
INDIAN 

SHORT 

STORIES 


EDITED BY 

MANMOHAN SAKSENA, ma. 



GEOFFREY CUMBERLEGE 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 



Oxford University Press^ Amen House^ London E.CA 

GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELUNOTON 
BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHI CAPE TOWN IBADAN 

Geoffrey Cumberlege^ Publisher to the Umversity 


Advance copies prepared in 1950 
First published 1951 
Reprinted 1952 
Reprinted 1955 {three times) 
Reprinted 1954 


Printed in India by S. G. Bhattacharya, M.A., at the Inland Printing 
Worlts, 60-3 Dharamtala Street, Calcutta 13, and published by GcoflTrey 
Ciunbcrlegc, Oxford University Press, Mercantile Buildings, Calcutta 1 



CONTENTS 

RABINDRANATH TAGORE : The Costaway . . I 

RRAMATHA GHAUDHURY : Sitesk^s Story . .15 

MULK RAJ ANAND : The Lost Child . . .27 

RAJA RAO : Javni . . . . .34 

R. K. NARAYAN : Half-a-Rupee Worth . . 54 

PREM GHAND : God Uves in the Panch . . 63 

TARASHANKAR BANERjEE I Boatman Tarini . . 80 

RAHUL SANKRiTYAYAN : Prahha . . .97 

BHABANi BHATTACHARYA : Desperate Women . 131 

K. AHMAD ABBAS : Sparrows . . . *140 

MANjERi s. isvARAN : Between Two Flags . .149 

SARATCHANDRA CHATTBRJI : Laloo . . .162 

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS . . , .177 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

For permission to use copyright material the 
Publisher’s thanks are due to the Tmstees of the estate 
of the author and Messrs Macmillan & Co. Ltd for 
‘The Castaway’ from Mashi and Other Stories by 
Rabindranath Tagore ; Visva-Bharati for ‘Sitesh’s 
Story’ from Tales of Four Friends by Pramatha 
Chaudhury ; the author and Messrs Jonathan Cape, 
Ltd for ‘The Lost Child* from The Barber's Trade 
Union and Other Stories by Dr Mulk Raj Anand ; the 
Asia Press Inc., New York for ‘Javni’ by Raja Rao 
from Asia and the Americas, November 1933 ; the author 
for ‘Half-a-Rupe *26 orth’ by R. K. Narayan from 
the Illustrated WeeKty of India ; Padma Publications Ltd 
for ‘Boatman Tarini’ by Tarashankar Banerjee from 
Tomorrow, Vol. II ; the author for ‘Prabha’ from 
Volga to Ganga by Rahul Sankrityayan ; the author 
for ‘Desperate Women’ by Bhabani Bhattacharya from 
the Illustrated Weekly of India’, Kutub Publishers for 
‘Sparrows’ from Rice and Other Stories by K. Ahmad 
Abbas, and the author for ‘Between Two Flags’ from 
Ho Anklet Bells for Her by Manjeri S. Isvaran. 



INTRODUCTION 

I 

'^HE short story in India is both ancient and modern. 

It is ancient, because it was born before literature 
itself. It is modern, because in its present form it 
derives mainly from new conditions and social urges, 
and above all, because it bears on it the heavy impress 
of the West. 

The earliest examples of the Indian short story go 
back to the Vedas and the Upanishads. It is not, 
however, until we come to the Ramqyana and the 
Mahabharata that we strike those inexhaustible mines 
from which Indian writers for ages have quarried 
for their material. For, for the first time in these 
books, the ancient legendary lore of the Aryans 
hardened into something which, despite its grounding 
in mythology, possessed a genuine human interest. 

To the Mahabharata can also be traced some of those 
fables and moral apologues which ’ later became 
famous. And it is in the moral apologue and fable 
that the origins of the Indian short story lie. 

Historically, the Indian fable goes back to at least 
three thousand years, if not more. Before the time of 
Aesop, which was the sixth century b.c., it had reached 
its maturity, and had travelled as far as Asia Minor 
in the north-west and China in the north-east. 

The chief sources of Indian fables and moral tales 
are to be found in the Buddhist Jatakas and Famhor 
tantra. The stories of the Jatakas had begun to cir- 
culate in the lifetime of the Master, and Buddha 
himself employed, as Christ did five hundred years 



INTRODUCTION 


vi 

after him, the moral tale in its most finishedform to 
drive home his lesson. One of the most famous 
stories in the Old Testament, the story of the two 
quarrelling women who appeared before Solomon^ 
is a Jataka tale and illustrates the wisdom of Buddha. 
Similarly, the well-known story of the hen that laid 
the golden egg is to be found in the Mahabharata. 

It is true, at first sight it might appear that the 
tales of the Panchatantra are borrowed from Aesop, who 
lived two hundred years earlier than Vishnu Sharma, 
the writer of Indian tales. But if we compare the two 
collections, and remember how these tales were in free 
circulation in the ancient civilized countries of the 
world, we can easily conclude that Aesop took them 
from the Ionian colonies of Asia Minor, and compiled 
them in book form. From Greece the tales travelled 
to Egypt. 

That the tales are of Indian origin will be con- 
clusively proved if we compare the Greek with the 
Indian tale. Aesop’s fables are simpler, less artistic, 
and weak in characterization, mainly because Aesop 
was unfamiliar with the real characteristics of Indian 
animals found in his stories. Thus the lion, who 
was not found in Greece, is a pale shadow of the 
King of Beasts in the Pamhatantra. Similarly, the fox 
of Aesop is no match to the jackal of Vishnu Sharma 
in cleverness, selfishness, and shrewdness. In Aesop 
the animals represent no one but themselves, in 
the Panchatantra they are used symbolically. The lion, 
in his majesty and nobility, stands for the king, and 
the shrewd and clever jackal for his wily minister. 
So also, while the tales of Aesop are planless, the tales 
in the Panchatantra are carefully divided into five books 



INTRODUCTION vii 

to illustrate the five essential modes of human behaviour 
in actual life. 

It is not difficult to see that if Vishnu Sharma of 
the Panckatantra is identical with Kautilya of the Artha- 
shastra, the celebrated statesman uses his fables as a 
commentary on the latter, and exemplifies through 
them the relations between a king, his minister, and 
the people, and how in a given situation an individual 
should behave. That also explains the superior beauty, 
wisdom, and wit of the Indian writer over the Greek. 

The tales oithePanchatantrav/ere translated, on account 
of their popularity, into various languages. As early 
as the fifth century a.d. a rendering in Pehlevi appeared 
in Persia by order of the Emperor. In A.n. 570 a 
Syrian version came out based on the Persian copy, 
and in a.d. 750 the Arabic scholar Abdulla Ibn 
Al-Mokafia translated the tales from Syrian into 
Arabic. The Arabic rendering contained,' beside 
the stories of the Panckatantra, a number of other tales 
from the Mahabharata and the Jatakas. And since 
this translation of the witty tales has been going on. 
for over two thousand years, it is not at all surprising 
to find them appear, in a slightly modified or even in 
the very same form, in Boccacio, in the Brothers Grimm, 
in La Fontaine, and in Andersen. 

Only a little less well-kno'wn than the Panckatantra 
tales are the stories of Vetal Panchavinski {Baital 
Pachisi), Sinhasan Dwitrinshika {Singkasan Battiski), Skuka 
Saptati (The Parrot Tales), and that great treasure- 
house of stories, Katha-saiit-sagar. Many of the tales 
of The Arabian_ Mghts can be easily traced to them. 
Indeed, the prototype of the Caliph Harun Al-Rashid, 
who goes about incognito through the streets of 



INTRODUCTION 


viii 

Baghdad, and is involved in numerous adventures, is 
King Vikram of Singhasan BatUshi. 

Of a different type altogether, and much more 
modern in their outlook, are the stories told in Dasha- 
kumarcharita. These tales, ascribed to the Sanskrit 
writer Dandin, are supposed to have been written 
in the sixth century a.d. They combine the colours 
of The Arabian Nights and The Decameron. Princes 
and princesses, rogues and scoundrels, pimps and 
thieves, crowd the romances of The Ten Princes with 
a vividness which is at once refreshing and without 
inhibition. The characters are not automatons ; 
-they do not walk on stilts. They are human, and their 
frailties are natural. 

Two things at once strike a reader of Katha-sarit- 
sagar, Panchatantra, Dashakumarcharita, and other 
Indian tales. They are the use of the device of 
•‘interboxing’ and the artistic finish of the story. 

Interboxing enabled the writer to insert one story 
inside another. This was sometimes carried to ridicu- 
lous lengths, and often made the reader confused and 
perplexed. Nevertheless, it was this Indian device 
which was so successfully carried out in The Arabian 
Nights, and which gave to that book its chief beauty. 

II 

To the Indian writer story-telling was no mere 
amusement. It was an art followed with the seriousness 
and persistence with which a lover courts his mistress. 
He could not do otherwise, for he lived on the patronage 
of a prince or a noble. And in a court where a single 
couplet could win a hundred thousand sovereigns 



INTRODUCTION ix 

in reward, no second-best stuff had any chance of 
recognition. 

It was this whole-hearted devotion to his art that 
later gave rise to the professional story-teller. In 
■course of time he came to be employed by the princes 
and nobles to while away their time. His lesser 
counterpart wandered with his mat from city squares 
to village chaupals. The stories which he told were 
mostly romantic stories, of fairies and jinn, of lovely 
princesses and gallant heroes, of sieges and of battles. 
Sometimes he embroidered the tales told in the great 
epics, and gave his own version. Often the tale 
he told had a moral purpose, but more often it 
had no other aim than to amuse. Every part of the 
story-teller’s body was brought into service to arouse 
interest, to emphasize some detail, to strike terror, 
or to create ‘that willing suspension of disbelief’ of 
which Coleridge spoke. The long winter evenings, 
the cool summer moonlit nights, and the dark days 
of the rainy season, alike provided opportunities 
to the story-teller to show his skill. 

With the Muslim invasion of India, literature 
received a setback. The invader frowned on stories 
whose sources lay in the Hindu epics or other Sanskrit 
books. The wit of Vishnu Sharma yielded to the 
reputed wit of Birbal, and the stories of The Arabian 
Nights or tales from the Persian epics regaled the time 
of the nobility. Only in the countryside the old tales 
from the Sanskrit epics or from Singhasan Battishi or 
Baital Pachisi still held sway. During the years 
of the decline of the Mughal rule and the rise of the 
Nawabs of Avadh, even cultured Hindus gave up 
the reading of ancient- story-classics, and took to 



X 


INTRODUCTION 


Hatim Tai, Fisana-i-Azad, Quissa Chahar-i-Darveshy 
Dastan~i-Amir Hamza, and the inevitable Alif-Laila. 

The beginnings of the Urdu short story may indeed 
be traced to these. 

With the advent of the British and the spread of 
English education, things changed. A generation 
fed on Scott, Dickens, Thackeray, and Jane Austen, 
was unlikely to go back to the artificial inanities of 
Nawabi romances. Similarly, readers of Poe and 
Hawthorne could find no interest in the over-ornate 
and exaggerated stories of Urdu writers. Like the 
old man in the Ancient Manner English writers now 
held Indian readers ‘in thrall’. 

The closing years of the nineteenth century and the 
early years of the present saw the short story in India 
slowly emerge in a new dress. It started with a slavish 
imitation of the Western models — at first English, 
then from English to French, and now from French 
to Russian — and it is still struggling to find its feet. 
That there were exceptions will be freely admitted. 
Here and there one did come across a Tagore, or a 
Saratchandra, or a Prem Ghand in those fateful 
years, but in the main those years were years of striving 
after form and content. 

It is really after World War I and with the begin- 
ning of the non-cooperation movement that short 
story writing in India took a firmer shape. In this 
the influence of Saratchandra and Rabindranath 
cannot be overestimated. Before Saratchandra 
appeared, the Indian short story was unreal. It 
lacked solidity and life. The writer attempted not 
so much to reproduce life as to embellish and decorate 
it by providing an imaginative escape into a false 



INTRODUCTION 2d 

romantic world. Saratchandra with his vast fund 
of experience came as a revelation. Before the 
stark realism of his work in which women and 
children of the lower middle class rub shoulders 
indiscriminately, in which great meannesses mix 
with large-heartedness and tolerance, in which 
libertines and puritans freely appear, and in which 
treachery and unfaithfulness are matched with self- 
effacement and fidelity, one simply stands amazed. 
Tagore, with his fine idealism, was incapable of 
painting a scoundrel. He was too much of an 
aristocrat to plunge into the lower levels of human 
wickedness and misery. 

Saratchandra remains, even todg.y, the first and the 
greatest of modern Indian short story writers. He 
exercised a powerful influence on his contemporaries, 
though the more abounding humanity of Tagore, 
and his gift of ‘loading every rift widi ore’, over- 
shadowed it. 

In the wake of these two, and largely following 
their example, short story writers sprang up in all 
provincial languages. At first their work, of necessity, 
was of an experimental nature. But gradually they 
found their feet firmly planted. 

At the same time English-educated writers increasing- 
ly read the French and Russian masters, available 
in cheap translations, and soon it became a fashion to 
discuss and to imitate Tolstoy, Maupassant, Chekov 
and Turgenev. English writers like Wells, Bennett 
and Galsworthy, though read, never exercised quite 
the same spell. 

The younger writers today write under many 
influences. They have been profoundly affected by 



XU 


INTRODUCTION 


the social and economic inequalities in the country ; 
their vision has been coloured by the influx of new 
ideas from the West ; and above all they feel they have 
a right to be heard. They do not hesitate to express 
their contempt and impatience of life. They feel it 
should be their task not merely to discover truth about 
man and life, but to set it down ruthlessly. Mulk 
Raj Anand, Ahmad Abbas, R. K. Narayan, Bhabani 
Bhattacharya and Tarashankar Baneijee belong 
to this class of writers. Their work is an expression 
of a society which is visibly disintegrating. In this 
sense, it has a profounder significance than the work 
of those predecessors who led us into the sheltered 
by-paths of romanticism, like a Jaishankar Prasad, or 
who plunged hesitatingly into the swirling waters 
of realism like a Prem Ghand. These young writers, 
it is true, lack the fluidity of apprehension, which was 
Tagore’s unique gift, and his large imaginative canvas ; 
their work does not possess the gem-like quality which 
every story of Tagore does, but they are never lost 
in dreams, nor are they ever betrayed into the haze 
of refined idealism. Their chief danger lies in their 
tendency to be drawn too much into the vortex of 
Marxian philosophy. Even Prem Ghand deliberately 
sets out to idolize the virtues of Gandhian philosophy. 


The short story in India is still in a transitional 
stage. Its form, accent, and language are still un- 
fixed. There are many more writers writing short 
stories today than ever before. But not one of them 
rises to the stature of Tagore, Saratchandra, or even 
Prem Ghand. Not one of them has been able 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

to capture the inimitable grace and humour of 
Pramatha Chaudhury. To read these, one should 
go to the original language in which their work was 
done. And this leads to another truth. The best 
short stories are being written today not in English 
but in Indian languages. To say this is not to under- 
rate the achievement of the Indian writers in English 
included in this volume: the work of Mulk Raj 
Anand, Raja Rao and R. K. Narayan will stand 
the test of any scrutiny. To their number is likely 
to be added another — ^Bhabani Bhattacharya. 

For obvious reasons it was not found possible in 
the present collection to include stories on a chrono- 
logical basis. Nor — owing to the editor’s ignorance of 
the Marathi and Gujarati languages and the paucity of 
translated work in English — could stories by eminent 
Marathi and Gujarati writers be included. But the 
volume will still be found, in a large measure, to be repre- 
sentative of Indian work in this form of literature. Almost 
all the writers included have an extraordinary visual and, 
if one may say so, auditory memory, which makes their 
stories vivid and refreshing. And there is no story in this 
volume which does not spring from an impression or 
perception pressing enough to make the writer write. 

The short story has a great future in this country 
for the simple reason that it is a unique medium for 
the intimate close-up, and the oddities and slants 
of life. As long as this country remains as various 
as it is, and the disparities and incohesions of life are 
not rubbed smooth by its becoming more firmly 
organized, the short story will continue to progress 
from beauty to beauty, and to reflect the individual 
vision. As time passes, the intellectual and emotional 



XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


limitations which overmaster some of the writers 
today will be overcome, and give place to a clearer 
way of seeing and saying, in both of which, according 
to Sean O’Faolain, the essence of the short story lies. 

M. M. S. 



RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
The Castaway 

*^owARDS evening the storm was at its height. 

From the terrific downpour of rain, the crash of 
thunder, and the repeated flashes of lightning, you 
might think that a battle of the gods and demons 
was raging in the skies. Black clouds waved like 
the Flags of Doom. The Ganges was lashed into a 
fury, and the trees of the gardens on either bank 
swayed from side to side with sighs and groans. 

In a closed room of one of the riverside houses 
at Ghandemagore, a husband and his wife were 
seated on a bed spread on the floor, intently discussing. 
An earthen lamp burned beside them. 

The husband, Sharat, was saying ; T wish you 
would stay on a few days more ; you would then be 
able to return home quite strong again.’ 

The wife, Kiran, was saying ; T have quite re- 
covered already. It will not, cannot possibly, do 
me any harm to go home now.’ 

Every married person will at once understand 
that the conversation was not quite so brief as I have 
reported it. The matter was not difiicult, but the 
arguments for and against did not advance it towards 
a solution. Like a rudderless boat, the dis- 
cussion kept turning round and round the same 
point ; and at last it -threatened to be overwhelmed 
in a flood of tears. 

Sharat said : ‘The doctor thinks you should stop 
here a few days longer.’ 

Kiran replied : ‘Your doctor knows everything !’ 



2 RABINDRANATH TAGORE 

‘Well,’ said Sharat, ‘you know that just now all 
sorts of illness are abroad. You would do well to 
stop here a month or two more.’ 

‘And at this moment I suppose every one in this 
place is perfectly well !’ 

What had happened was this : Kiran was a 
universal favourite with her family and neighbours, 
so that, when she fell seriously ill, they were all anxious. 
The village wiseacres thought it shameless for her 
husband to make so much fiiss about a mere wife 
and even to suggest a change of air, and asked if 
Sharat supposed that no woman had ever been ill 
before, or whether he had found out that the folk 
of the place to which he meant to take her were 
immortal. Did he imagine that the writ of Fate 
did not run there ? But Sharat and his mother turned 
a deaf ear to them, thinking that the little life 
of their darling was of greater importance than 
the united wisdom of a village. People are wont tO' 
reason thus when danger threatens their loved ones. 
So Sharat went to Chandernagore, and Kiran re- 
covered, though she was still very weak. There was 
a pinched look on her face which filled the beholder 
with pity, and made his heart tremble, as he thought 
how narrowly she had escaped death. 

Kiran was fond of society and amusement ; the 
loneliness of her riverside villa did not suit her at all. 
There was nothing to do, there were no interesting 
neighbours, and she hated to be busy all day with 
medicine and dieting. There was no fun in measuring 
doses and msiking fomentations. Such was the subject 
discussed in their closed room on this stormy 
evening. 



THE CASTAWAY 


5 


So long as Kirau deigned to argue, there was a 
chance of a fair fight. When she ceased to reply, 
and with a toss of her head disconsolately looked the 
other way, the poor man was disarmed. He was- 
on the point of surrendering unconditionally when a 
servant shouted a message through the shut door. 

Sharat got up, and, opening the door, learnt that 
a boat had been upset in the storm, and that one of 
the occupants, a young Brahmin boy, had succeeded 
in swimming ashore in their garden. 

Kiran was at once her own sweet self, and set to 
work to get out some dry clothes for the boy. She 
then warmed a cup of milk, and invited him to her 
room. 

The boy had long curly hair, big expressive eyes, 
and no sign yet of hair on the face. Koran, after 
getting him to drink some milk, asked him all about 
himself. 

He told her that his name was Nilkanta, and that 
he belonged to a theatrical troupe. They were coming 
to play in a neighbouring viUa when the boat had 
suddenly foundered in the storm* He had no idea 
what had become of his companions. He was a 
good swimmer, and had just managed to reach the 
shore. 

The boy stayed with them. His narrow escape 
firom a terrible death made Kiran take a warm interest 
in him. Sharat thought the boy’s appearance at 
this moment rather a good thing, as his wife would 
now have something to amuse her, and might be 
persuaded to stay on for some time longer. Her 
mother-in-law, too, was pleased at the prospect of 
profiting their Brahmin guest by her kindness. And 

2 



4 RABINDRANATH TAGORE 

Nilkanta himself was delighted at his double escape 
from his master and from the other world, as well as 
at finding a home in this wealthy family. 

But in a short while Sharat and his mother changed 
their opinion, and longed for his departure. The boy 
found a secret pleasure in smoking Sharat’s hookahs ; 
he would calmly go oflF in pouring rain with Sharat’s 
best silk umbrella for a stroll through the village, 
and make friends with all whom he met. Moreover, 
he had got hold of a mongrel village dog which he 
petted so recklessly that it came indoors with muddy 
paws, and left tokens of its visit on Sharat’s spotless 
bed. Then he gathered about him a devoted band 
of boys of all sorts and sizes, and the result was that 
not a solitary mango in the neighbourhood had a 
chance of ripening that season. 

There is no doubt that Kiran had a hand in spoiling 
the boy. Sharat often warned her about it, but 
she would not listen to him. She made a dandy of 
him with Sharat’s cast-off clothes, and gave him new 
ones too. And because she felt drawn towards him, 
and also had a curiosity to know more about him, 
she was constantly calling him to her own room. 
After her bath and midday meal Kiran would be 
seated on the bedstead with her betel-leaf box by her 
side ; and while her maid combed and dried her 
hair, Nilkanta would stand in front and recite pieces 
out of his repertory with appropriate gesture 
and song, his elf-locks waving wildly. Thus the long 
afternoon hours passed merrily away. Kiran would 
often try to persuade Sharat to sit with her as one of the 
audience, but Sharat, who had taken a cordial dislike 
to the boy, refused, nor could Nilkanta do his part 



5 


THE CASTAWAY 

half so well when Sharat was there. His mother 
would sometimes be lured by the hope of hearing 
sacred names in the recitation ; but love of her mid- 
day sleep speedily overcame devotion, and she lay 
lapped in dreams. 

The boy often got his ears boxed and pulled by 
Sharat, but as this was nothing to what he had been 
used to as a member of the troupe, he did not mind it 
in the least. In his short experience of the world he 
had come to the conclusion that, as the earth consisted 
of land and water, so human life was made up of 
eatings and beatings, and that the beatings largely 
predominated. 

It was hard to tell Nilkanta’s age. If it was about 
fourteen or fifteen, then his face was too old' for his 
years ; if seventeen or eighteen, then it was too 
young. He was either a man too early or a boy too 
late. The fact was that, joining the theatrical band 
when very young, he had played the parts of Radhika, 
Damayanti, Sita, and Bidya’s companion. A thought- 
ful Providence so arranged things that he grew to the 
exact stature that his manager required, and then 
growth ceased. Since everyone saw how small he 
was, and he himself felt small, he did not receive due 
respect for his years. These causes, natural and 
artificial, combined to make him sometimes seem 
immature for seventeen years, and at other times a 
lad of fourteen but far too knowing for seventeen. 
And as no sign of hair appeared on his face, the 
confusion became greater. Either because he smoked 
or because he used language beyond his years, his 
lips puckered into lines that showed him to be old 
and hard ; but innocence and youth shone in his. 



6 RABINDRANATH TAGORE 

large eyes: I fancy that his heart remained young, 
but the hot glare of publicity had been a forcing- 
house that ripened untimely his outward aspect. 

In the quiet shelter of Sharat’s house and garden 
at Ghandemagore, Nature had leisure to work her 
way unimpeded. He had lingered in a kind of 
unnatural youth, but now he silently and swiftly 
overpassed that stage. His seventeen or eighteen 
years came to adequate revelation. No one observed 
the change, and its first sign was this, that when 
Kiran treated him like a boy, he felt ashamed. When 
the gay Kiran one day proposed that he should play 
the part of lady’s companion, the idea of woman’s 
dress hurt him, though he could not say why. So 
now, when she called for him to act over again his 
old characters, he disappeared. It never occurred 
to him that he was even now not much more than 
a lad-of-all-work in a strolling company. He even 
made up his mind to pick up a little education from 
Sharat’s factor. But, because Nilkanta was the pet 
of his master’s wife, the factor could not endure the 
sight of him. Also, his restless training made it 
impossible for him to keep his mind long engaged ; 
presently, the alphabet did a misty dance before his 
eyes. He would sit long enough with an open book 
on his lap, leaning against a champak bush beside the 
Ganges. The waves sighed below, boats floated 
past, birds flitted and twittered restlessly above. 
What thoughts passed through his mind as he looked 
down on that book he alone knew, if indeed he did 
know. He never advanced from one word to another, 
but the glorious thought that he was actually reading 
a book filled his soul with exultation. Whenever 



THE CASTAWAY 


7 


a boat went by, he lifted his book, and pretended 
to be reading hard, shouting at the top of his voice. 
But his energy dropped as soon as the audience was 
gone. 

Formerly he sang his songs automatically, but 
now their tunes stirred in his mind. Their words 
were of little import, and foil of trifling alliteration. 
Even the little meaning they had was beyond his 
comprehension ; yet when he sang — 


Twice-born bird, ah I wherefore stirred 
To wrong our royal lady ? 

Goose, ah I say why wilt thou slay 
Her in forest shady ? 

then he felt as if transported to another world, and 
to far other folk. This familiar earth and his own 
poor life became music, and he was transformed. 
The tale of goose and king’s daughter flung upon the 
mirror of his mind a picture of surpassing beauty. It 
is impossible to say what he imagined he himself was, 
but foe destitute little slave of foe theatrical troupe 
faded from his memory. 

When with evening foe child of want lies down, 
dirty and hungry, in his squalid home, and hears 
of prince and princess and fabled gold, then in foe 
dark hovel with its dim flickering candle, his mind 
springs free from her bonds of poverty and misery, 
and walks in fresh beauty and glowing raiment, strong 
beyond aU fear of hindrance, through that fairy realm 
where all is possible. 

Even so, this drudge of wandering players fashioned 
himself and his world anew, as he moved in spirit 
amid his songs. The lapping water, rustling leaves. 



8 RABINDRANATH TAGORE 

axid calling birds ; the goddess who had given shelter 
to him, the helpless, the God-forsaken ; her gracious, 
lovely face, her exquisite arms with their shining 
bangles, her rosy feet as soft as flower-petals ; all 
these by some magic became one with the music of 
his song. When the singing ended, the mirage faded, 
and Nilkanta of the stage appeared again, with his 
wild elf-locks. Fresh from the complaints of his 
neighbour, the owner of the despoiled mango-orchard, 
Sharat would come and box his ears, and cuff him. 
The boy Nilkanta, the misleader of adoring youths, 
went forth once more, to make ever new mischief 
by land and water and in the branches that are above 
the earth. 

Shortly after the advent of Nilkanta, Sharat’s 
younger brother, Satish, came to spend his college 
vacation with them. Kiran was hugely pleased at 
finding a fresh occupation. She and Satish were 
of the same age, and the time passed pleasantly in 
game-s and quarrels and makings-up and laughter 
and even tears. Suddenly she would clasp him over 
the eyes, from behind, with vermilion-stained hands, 
she would write ‘monkey’ on his back, and sometimes 
bolt the door on him from outside amidst peals of 
laughter. Satish in his turn did not take things lying 
down ; he would take her keys and rings, he would 
put pepper among her betel ; he would tie her to the 
bed when she was not looking. 

Meanwhile, heaven only knows what possessed 
poor Nilkanta. He was suddenly filled with a bitter- 
ness which he must avenge on somebody or something. 
He thrashed his devoted boy-followers for no fault, 
and sent them away crying. He would kick his pet 



THE CASTAWAY 


9 


mongrel till it made the skies resound with its whinings^ 
When he went out for a walk, he would litter his path 
with twigs and leaves beaten from the roadside shrubs, 
with his cane. 

Kiran liked to see people enjoying good fare. 
Nilkanta had an immense capacity for eating, and 
never refused a good thing, however often it was- 
offered. So Kiran liked to send for him to have 
his meals in her presence, and ply him with delicacies, 
happy in the bliss of seeing this Brahmin boy eat to 
satiety. After Satish’s arrival she had much less 
spare time on her hands, and was seldom present when 
Nilkanta’s meals were served. Before, her absence 
made no difference to the boy*s appetite, and he 
would not rise till he had drained his cup of milk, and 
rinsed it thoroughly with water. 

But now, if Kiran was not present to ask him to try 
this and that, he was miserable, and nothing tasted 
right. He would get up without eating much, and say 
to the serving-maid in a choking voice : T am not 
hungry.’ He thought in imagination that the news 
of his repeated refusal, T am not hungry,’ would reach 
Kiran ; he pictured her concern, and hoped that she 
would send for him, and press him to eat. But nothing 
of the sort happened. Kiran never knew, and never 
sent for him ; and the maid finished whatever he 
lef^. He would then put out the lamp in his room, 
and throw himself on his bed in the darkness, burying 
his head in the pillow in a paroxysm of sobs. What 
was his grievance ? Against whom ? And from whom 
did he expect redress ? At last, when none else came. 
Mother Sleep soothed with her soft caresses the 
wounded heart of the motherless lad. 



10 RABINDRANATH TAGORE 

Nilkanta came to the unshakable conviction that 
Satish was poisoning Kiran’s mind againsi him. If 
Kiran was absent-minded, and had not her usual 
smile, he would jump to the conclusion that some 
trick of Satish had made her angry with him. He 
took to praying to the gods, with all the fervour of 
his hate, to make him at the next rebirth Satish, and 
Satish him He had an idea that a Brahmin’s wrath 
could never be in vain ; and the more he tried to 
consume Satish with the fire of his curses, the more 
did his own heart burn within him. And upstairs 
he would hear Satish laughing and joking with his 
sister-in-law. 

Nilkanta never dared openly to show his enmity 
to Satish. But he would contrive a hundred petty 
ways of causing him annoyance. When Satish went 
for a swim in the river, and left his soap on the steps 
■of the bathing-place, on coming back for it he would 
find that it had disappeared. Once he found his 
favourite striped tunic floating past him on the water, 
and thought it had been blown away by the wind. 

One day Kiran, desiring to entertain Satish, 
sent for Nilkanta to recite as usual, but he stood 
there in gloomy silence. Quite surprised, Kiran 
asked him what was the matter. But he remained 
silent. And when again pressed by her to repeat 
some particular favourite piece of hers, he answered : 
‘I don’t remember’, and walked away. 

At last the time came for their return home. Every- 
body was busy packing up. Satish was going with 
them. But to Nilkanta nobody said a word. The 
question whether he was to go or not seemed not to 
have occurred to anybody. 



THE CASTAWAY 


11 


The question, as a matter of fact, had been raised 
by Kiran, who had proposed to take him along with 
them. But her husband and his mother and brother 
had all objected so strenuously that she let the matter 
drop. A couple of days before they were to start, 
she sent for the boy, and with kind words advised him 
to go back to his own home. 

So many days had he felt neglected that this touch 
of kindness was too much for him ; he burst into tears. 
Kiran’s eyes were also brimming over. She was 
filled with remorse at the thought that she had created 
a tie of aflFection which could not be permanent. 

But Satish was much annoyed at the blubbering 
of this overgrown boy. ‘Why does the fool stand 
there howling instead of speaking ?’ said he. When 
Kiran scolded him for an unfeeling creature, 
he replied : ‘Sister mine, you do not understand. 
You are too good and trustful. This fellow turns 
up from the Lord knows where, and is treated like 
a king. Naturally the tiger has no wish to become 
a mouse again.^ And he has evidently discovered 
that there is nothing like a tear or two to soften your 
heart.’ 

NiUcanta hurriedly left the spot. He felt he would 
like to be a knife to cut Satish to pieces ; a needle 
to pierce him through and through ; a fire to 
burn him to ashes. But Satish was not even scarred. 
It was only his own heart that bled and bled. 

Satish had brought with him from Calcutta a 
grand inkstand. The inkpot was set in a mother-of- 
pearl boat drawn by a German-silver goose support- 


1 A reference to a folk-story of a saint who turned a pet mouse into a tiger. 



12 RAPINDRANATH TAGORE 

ing a penholder. It was a great favourite of his, and 
he cleaned it carefully every day with an old silk 
handkerchief. Eliran would laugh and, tapping the 
silver bird’s beak, would say — 


Twice-bom bird, ah ! wherefore stirred 
To wrong our royal lady ? 

and the usual war of words would break out between 
her and her brother-in-law. 

The day before they were to start, the inkstand 
was missing, and could nowhere be found. Eliran 
smiled, and said : ‘Brother-in-law, your goose has 
flown oflF to look for your Damayanti.’ 

But Satish was in a great rage. He was certain 
that Nilkanta had stolen it — for several people said 
they had seen him prowling about the room die night 
before. He had the accused brought before him. 
ELiran also was there. ‘You have stolen my inkstand, 
you thief !’ he blurted out. ‘Bring it back at once.’ 
Nilkanta had always taken punishment from Sharat, 
deserved or undeserved, with perfect equanimity. 
But, when he was called a thief in Kiran’s presence, 
his eyes blazed with a fierce anger, his breast swelled, 
and his throat choked. If Satish had said another 
word he would have flown at him like a wild cat, and 
used his nails like claws. 

KLiran was greatly distressed at the scene, and 
taking the boy into another room said in her sweet, 
kind way : ‘Nilu, if you really have taken that ink- 
stand give it to me quietly, and I shall see that no one 
says another word to you about it.’ Big tears coursed 
down the boy’s cheeks, till at last he hid his face in his 
hands, and wept bitterly. Kiran came back from 



THE CASTAWAY 


13 


the room, and said : T am sure Nilkanta has not 
taken the inkstand.’ Sharat and Satish were equally 
positive that no other than Nilkanta could have done it. 

But Eiiran said determinedly : ‘Never.’ 

Sharat wanted to cross-examine the boy, but his 
wife refused to allow it. 

Then Satish suggested that his room and box 
should be searched. And Kiran said : ‘If you dare 
do such a thing I will never, never forgive 
you. You shall not spy on the poor innocent boy.* 
And as she spoke, her wonderful eyes filled with tears. 
That settled the matter, and effectually prevented 
any further molestation of Nilkanta ! 

Kiran’s heart overflowed with pity at this attempted 
outrage on a homeless lad. She got two new suits of 
clothes and a pair of shoes, and with these and a bank- 
note in her hand she quietly went into Nilkanta’s 
room in the evening. She intended to put these 
parting presents into his box as a surprise. The box 
itself had been her gift. 

From her bunch of keys she selected one that fitted, 
and noiselessly opened the box. It was so jumbled 
up with odds and ends that the new clothes would 
not go in. So she thought she had better take every- 
thing out and pack the box for him. At first knives, 
tops, kite-flying reels, bamboo twigs, polished shells 
for peeling green mangoes, bottoms of broken tum- 
blers and such-like things dear to a boy’s heart were 
discovered. Then there came a layer of linen, clean 
and otherwise. And from under the linen there 
emerged the missing inkstand, goose and all ! 

Kiran, with flushed face, sat down helplessly with 
the inkstand in her hand, puzzled and wondering. 



14 RABINDRANATH TAGORE 

In the meantime, Nilkanta had come into the room 
•from behind without Kiran knowing it. He had 
■seen the whole thing, and thought that Kiran had 
■come like a thief to catch him in his thieving — and 
that his deed was out. How could he ever hope to 
convince her that he was not a thief, and that only 
revenge had prompted him to take the inkstand, 
which he meant to throw into the river at the first 
-chance ? In a weak moment he had put it in his box 
instead. ‘He was not a thief/ his heart cried out, 
^not a thief !’ Then what was he ? What could 
-he say ? He had stolen, and yet he was not a thief ! 
He could never explain to Kiran how grievously 
wrong she was in taking him for a thief ; how could he 
■bear the thought that she had tried to spy on him ? 

At last Kiran with a deep sigh replaced the inkstand 
in the box, and, as if she were the thief herself, 
■covered it up with the linen and the trinkets as they 
were before ; and at the top she placed the presents 
together with the banknote which she had brought 
for him. 

The next day the boy was nowhere to be found. 
The villagers had not seen him ; the police could 
•discover no trace of him. Said Sharat : ‘Now, 
as a matter of curiosity, let us have a look at his box.’ 
But Kiran was obstinate in her refusal to allow that to 
be done. 

She had the box brought up to her own room ; 
and taking out the inkstand alone, threw it into the river. 

The whole family went home. In a day the garden 
became desolate. And only that starving mongrel 
of Nilkanta’s remained prowling along the river-bank, 
whining and whining as if its heart would break. 



PRAMATHA CHAUDHURY 
Sitesh's Story 

T WAS then in London. I don’t exactly recollect what 
month it was — either the end of October or the- 
beginning of November. Because I remember this 
much, that fires had begun to be lighted in the rooms. 
One morning I got up and found, on looking outside, 
that it was evening — -just as if the light of the sun 
had gone out, yet the gas had not been lit. On going 
to the window to find out what had happened, I saw 
that all the people in the street had their faces hidden 
by umbrellas. You could only make out which were 
men and which were women by the difference in their 
dress and gait. Those who were walking rapidly with 
heads buried in their umbrellas, and looking neither 
to right nor left, were men, I gathered ; and those 
who, holding their umbrellas in their right hand, 
and gathering their skirts up to the knees with their 
left, were hopping along like snipe, were women, I 
surmised. From this I guessed that it had begun to- 
rain ; for this rain was so fine that it could not be 
seen, and so soft that it could not be heard. 

Which reminds me, have you ever noticed that in 
England it never clouds over when it rains ? — Only 
the sky becomes murky all over, and the trees, catching 
the infection, all become limp, and the roads all become 
slushy with mud. It seems as if half the rainy weather- 
comes down from above, and the other half rises up 
from below ; and’ between the two of them they 
make a dismal, dirty and disgusting mess all over the- 
sky. I need hardly say that when I saw the day look. 



16 PRAMATHA CHAUDHURY 

like this the first thing in the morning, my heart sank 
into my boots. Englishmen say they feel like 
■committing murder on such days ; so it’s small wonder 
that we should feel like committing suicide under 
the circumstances. 

I had an engagement to go to Richmond with a 
fiiend ; but on a day like this I didn’t feel inclined 
to go out. So I had breakfast, and began to read 
The Times. I read the whole paper that day, from 
first to last letter, without omitting a single word. 
That day I first discovered that the outer skin of The 
Times was more appetizing than the pulp, the 
advertisements more interesting than the articles 
themselves. That which one feels on reading the 
articles is called irritation ; and that which one feels 
•on reading the advertisements is called temptation. 
However that may be, as soon as I had finished reading 
the paper, the maid brought in lunch, which I sat 
and finished where I was. It was then two o’clock. 
Yet to all appearance there was no change outside, 
because the English rain knows neither how to fell, 
nor how to stop. The only difference apparent was 
that the light of day had grown so dim that you 
■couldn’t read print without lighting the lamp. 

Unable to settle down to anything, I began pacing 
Tip and down the room ; but that soon became tire- 
some. Turning on the gas, I began to read again. 
At first I took down a law-book, Anson’s Contract. I 
read the same thing ten times over, but not a word 
-of ‘offer’ and ‘acceptance’ could my brain grasp. 
‘Do you agree to this ?’ I ask ; to which you reply 
‘I agree.’ When I saw what a complicated thing 
iman had made of such a simple matter, I felt hopeless 



SITESH’S STORY 


17 


about the future of mankind. If people only kept 
their word, we should not have to bear the burden of 
all this rubbish. I took the dust of Anson’s hooves, 
and put him back on the topmost shelf of the bookcase. 

I then noticed an old copy of Punch lying before me, 
and proceeded to read again. To teU you the truth, 
instead of being moved to laughter, that day I actually 
got annoyed with Punch. I felt astonished that people 
bought such machine-made jokes with money, and 
read them. I saw the vision of a future, when even 
witticisms labelled ‘Made in Germany’ would find 
a ready sale in the markets of the world. I perceived 
that, as in their skies, so in the minds of this people, 
lightning flashes only occasionally — and even then it 
is pale and sprawling. As soon as this struck me, 
I shoved Punch into the grate, and the fire roared with 
delight. I was glad to find that at any rate a material 
substance appreciated the worth of Punch. 

Then I warmed myself at the fire for about ten 
minutes, standing with my back to the fireplace. 
After which I began to read again — a novel, this 
time. It opened with the description of a dinner- 
party. On the table there were rows and rows of 
silver candlesticks, heaps and heaps of silver plate, 
dozens and dozens of fluted glasses, glittering like 
diamonds. And inside aU those glasses there were 
wines of Spain and France and Germany — some of 
the colour of rubies, others of emeralds, others of 
topaz. The name of the hero was Algernon, that 
of the heroine Millicent. The former was the son of 
a duke, the latter the daughter of a millionaire ; 
Algernon was as handsome as a god and Millicent as 
lovely as a nymph. They had recently come to love 



18 PRAMATHA CHAUDHURY 

each other, with a love that was exceedingly pure, 
exceedingly sweet and exceedingly deep. At this 
dinner, Algernon was going to propose to Millicent, 
and she was going to accept him, thereby making 
the contract complete. 

Just as the soul of Kalidasa, riding on a cloud, had 
journeyed to Alaka on a certain rainy day in the 
distant past, so my soul, in this inclement weather, 
strode the mist towards the silver realm described 
in this novel. I saw with the eye of my imagination 
a yoxmg maiden, like the love-lorn wife of Yaksha, 
waiting and longing for me to come. And her beauty 1 
— words fail to describe it. She was like a golden 
image decked with precious stones. It goes without 
saying that I fell madly in love with her, as soon as our 
eyes met. I dedicated myself heart and soul to her, 
without further ado ; and she accepted me tenderly 
and lovingly. Finally I won, not only the Yaksha’s 
daughter, but his money also. Just then the clock 
struck four, and awoke me from my day-dream. When 
I opened my eyes, I found that I was not in fairyland 
at all, but in a damp dark land, full of slush. It was 
impossible to sit alone in my room any longer; so, 
taking my hat, umbrella and overcoat, I went out 
into the streets. 

You know that, come rain, come storm, the streets of 
London are always full of people — and so they were 
that day also. As far as the eye could reach, there 
was a continuous flow of human beings, all dressed in 
black ; with black hats on their heads, black boots 
on their feet, and black umbrellas in their hands., 
At first sight it seemed as if innumerable daguerrotype 
pictures had come out of innumerable books, and 



SITESH’S STORY 


igr 

were rushing about the street in all directions. I 
felt more lonely in this crowd than in my room, 
because among all these thousands and thousands of 
men and women, there was not a single person whomu 
I knew, with whom I could exchange a few words ;; 
and yet at the moment I was overcome with longing, 
to talk to a fellow-creature. It is only on such days: 
and under such circumstances that one can fully 
realize how necessary man is to man. 

Wandering aimlessly about, I arrived somewhere 
near Holborn Circus. I saw a small old bookshop 
in front of me, in which a shrunken old man was. 
sitting beneath a gas-light. The frock-coat he wore 
must have been older than himself, and what had 
been black in its youth had now turned yellow with 
age. Absent-mindedly I entered the shop. The 
old man hastily and respectfiiUy rose to his feet. From 
his behaviour it would appear that a fashionably- 
dressed customer like mysefr had never before crossed 
the threshold of his shop. He dusted this book and 
that, and kept bringing it to me. Telling him not to- 
disturb himself, I myself pulled out one book from 
here, another from there, and began turning over 
the pages. I looked at the pictures of one for five 
minutes, then read a few pages of another. You all'; 
know how interesting it is to rummage among old 
books ; and I was absorbed in this enjoyment, when, 
a sweet scent, like a whiff of spring on a rainy day,, 
floated suddenly into the room, whence I know not. 
The scent was as penetrating as it was faint, and belong- 
ed to that class of perfume which enters your heart 
unawares, and stirs you to the depths. It was not 
the fragrance of flowers, because that is borne on the.- 

3 



20 


PRAMATHA GHAUDHURY 


wind and scattered in the air ; it has no point. But 
this scent was of the kind that is propelled along a 
fine line, and pierces the heart like an unseen arrow. 
I knew it must be the scent either of musk or of pat- 
chouli — that it had its origin in flesh and blood. Some- 
what startled, I turned round to find a woman, dressed 
in black from top to toe, standing like a hooded snake 
resting on its tail. She didn’t turn her eyes away, 
though she saw me staring at her open-mouthed ; 
but kept on smiling with compressed lips, as one does 
on meeting an old acquaintance. Yet I could swear 
that I had never set eyes on this woman in all my life. 
Unable to fathom the mystery of that smile, I turned 
my back on her somewhat shamefacedly, and began 
looking at a book. But not a single line of it caught 
my eyes. I felt as if her eyes were piercing my back 
like knives. This made me so uncomfortable that I 
turned towards her again, and saw the same enig- 
matic smile on her face still. On closer observation, 
I found that the smile belonged, not to her lips, but 
to her eyes. From the comers of both her eyes, which 
were blue as steel, and hard as steel, that smile 
glittered like the keen edge of a knife. As often as I 
tried to avoid her gaze, so often did my eyes turn 
towards it again and again. They say the eyes of 
certain snakes possess a magnetic power, which draws 
birds from the tree down to the ground — and they 
can’t fly away, however much they may flap their 
wings. My mind was in the same condition as 
those birds. 

I need hardly say that by this time I had become 
mentally intoxicated ; the scent of patchouli and 
the light of those eyes had combined to excite me both 



SITESH’S STORY 


21 


in mind and body. My brain was in a whirl, so I 
didn’t know what I was doing at the time. All that 
I remember now is that suddenly we brushed against 
each other. I apologized ; she replied smilingly, 
Tt’s my fault, not yours.’ Something inside me 
vibrated at the tone of her voice, which was not that 
of a flute, but of a stringed instrument. There was 
resonance in its tone. After this introduction, we 
began to talk to each other as if we had been friends 
of long standing. I showed her a picture from some 
book, she drew out another and asked me if I had read 
it. I don’t know how much time passed by in this 
way. I gathered from her conversation that she 
was much better read than I was ; she was equally 
well acquainted with German, French and Italian. 
I knew French, so in order to show off my knowledge 
I took up a French book and started reading it from 
the middle. She stood behind me and, looking over 
my shoulder, tried to see what I was reading. 

What I was reading in that French book was this 
verse : 

Si vous rCavez rim a rm dire, 

Pourquoi venir aupres de moi ? 

Pourquoi mefaire ce sourire 
Qui toumerait la Ute au roi ? 

which, roughly translated, means — Tf you haven’t 
anything to say to me, then why did you come near 
me, and why did you smile at me that smile, which 
would turn the head of a king ?’ 

When she saw what I was reading, the fair one broke 
into a little laugh. Her laughter dashed against my 
face, and blurred my vision. I could rdad no more. 



22 PRAMATHA GHAUDHURY 

I was like a litde child caught doing something naughty, 
who turns and twists and bends, and looks shame- 
facedly from one side to another, yet cannot say a word. 

I shut the book and, calling the old man, asked 
him the price. One shilling, he said. Taking out a 
morocco-leather case from my breast-pocket, I found 
there were only five sovereigns in it, and not a single 
shilling. I fumbled first in one pocket, then in another, 
but was unable to find one. Whereupon my newly 
found firiend brought out a shilling from her pocket 
and, putting it into the old man’s hand, said to me, 
‘You needn’t change a sovereign. I’ll take that book.’ 
‘No,’ said I, ‘that won’t do.’ She smiled and 
replied, ‘Well, let it be for today ; you can return 
me the money when we meet next.’ 

After that we both left the shop. Outside my 
companion asked me, ‘Are you going anywhere in 
particular now ?’ 

‘No,’ I replied. 

‘Then come with me up to Oxford Circus. A 
pretty woman has much to trouble her, walking alone 
in the streets of London.’ 

On hearing this suggestion, it struck me that the 
girl was attracted by me. Beaming with joy, I asked 
her, ‘Why?’ 

‘Because men belong to the race of monkeys. If 
they see a girl walking by herself in the streets, and 
if she is young and pretty, then out of a thousand 
men, five hundred will turn again and again to look 
at her, fifty will accompany their looks with a sweet 
smile, five will try and force their acquaintance upon 
her, and at least one will come up to her and say 
— I love you.’ 



SITESH’S STORY 23 

‘If such be our nature, then why take the risk of 
my company ?’ 

She stopped suddenly and, looking at my face 
replied, T am not afraid of you.’ 

‘Why ?’ 

‘There is another race of men, besides monkeys — 
who protect us.’ 

‘A nd what race may that be ?’ 

‘I’ll tell you, if you won’t get angry with me ; 
because though it may not be palatable, what I say 
is true.’ 

‘You may safely say what you like, because it is 
impossible for me to get angry with you.’ 

‘It is the race of house-dogs. This race of men 
grovel at our feet, gaze wistfully into our faces, wag 
their tails with delight if we pat them, and don’t allow 
any other man to come near us. As soon as they see 
an outsider, they first growl, then show their teeth 
and, if that doesn’t make him bolt, then they bite him.’ 

Not knowing what to answer, I said, ‘I see you 
have a great respect for our sex.’ 

Fixing her eyes on my face, she replied, ‘If not 
respect, at least I have love.’ 

It seemed to me that her eyes bore witness to the 
truth of her words. 

We had been going towards Oxford Circus all 
this time, but had not progressed far, because both of 
us were walking along very slowly. 

After her last remark, I kept silent for a while. 
Then I asked a question, which will show how far I 
had lost my mental balance. 

‘When shall I see you again ?’ 

‘Never.’ 



24 PRAMATHA GHAUDHURY 

‘But you said just now that when we met 
again . . . . ’ 

‘That was only because you were hesitating to 
take the shilling.’ Saying which she looked at me, 
and I saw on her face the same mysterious smile, whose 
meaning I have not been able to fathom to this day. 

I was walking then like a man in his sleep. Though 
I could hear everything she said, I could not grasp 
its full meaning. 

So I said in reply to her smile, ‘You may not want 
to see me, but I want to see you again.’ 

‘Why ? Is there anything I can do for you ?’ 

‘Nothing, except let me see you ! As a matter of 
fact, I can’t live without seeing you.’ 

‘Have you read that in a novel or a play ?’ 

*I am not quoting from a book, but speaking from 
my own heart. What I have said is perfectly true.’ 

‘At your age, people don’t know their own minds ; 
it takes time even to know the truth and falsehood of 
one’s nature. Just as little children feel tempted to 
eat a sweet whenever they see one, so young men of 
twenty or thereabouts fall in love as soon as they see 
a girl. All that is the false appetite of youth.’ 

‘Perhaps what you say is true. But all I know is, 
that you have come to me today like the breath of 
spring, making the flowers bloom in my heart.’ 

‘They are the season-flowers of youth, which die 
in a moment ; they bear no fruit.’ 

‘If it be so, then why do you turn your face away 
from the flowers you yourself have called forth ? 
Whether they are ephemeral or immortal, time alone 
can tell.’ 

Upon this she looked somewhat serious, and kept 



SITESH’S STORY 25 

silent for a while. Then she said, ‘Do you imagine 
you can follow me for ever on this life’s path ?’ 

‘I believe I can.’ 

‘Not knowing whither I am leading you ?’ 

‘Your light will show me the way/ 

‘And if that light prove to be a will-o’-the-wisp ? 
Then some day you will lose your way and cry in the 
wilderness.’ 

I couldn’t think of anything to say in reply. Seeing 
me silent, she said, ‘There is such a look of sincerity 
in your face, that I know you are saying exactly what 
you feel at this moment. That is why I don’t wish 
to entangle your life with mine. It will only make 
you unhappy. I have no desire to make you suffer, 
as I have made so many others suffer. Firstly, you 
are a stranger in our midst ; secondly, you are 
altogether green.’ 

By this time we had reached Oxford Circus. I 
said somewhat excitedly, ‘My heart tells me that no 
greater sorrow can befall me than to lose you. So if 
you don’t wish to make me miserable, tell me when 
we shall meet again.’ 

Perhaps there was a certain pathos in my tone, 
which touched her heart. Looking at her eyes, I 
could see that she felt sorry for me. ‘Very well,’ 
she said, ‘give me your card, I shall write to you.’ 

Immediately I took out a card from my pocket-case, 
and gave it to her. When I asked for her card in 
return, she replied she hadn’t any with her. I pressed 
her to tell me her name, but she absolutely refused 
to do so. At last, after repeated entreaties, she said, 
‘Give me one of your cards, I’ll write it on the back ; 
but you must promise not to look at it till half-past six.’ 



-26 PRAMATHA GHAUDHURY 

It was then twenty minutes past six. I promised 
to wait patiently for another ten minutes. There- 
upon, taking my pocket-case from me, she turned 
her back, took out a card, scribbled something on it, 
put it back into the case, and returned it to me. Then 
jumping into a cab which was standing by, she told 
the man to drive straight to the Marble Arch. The 
cab disappeared in the twinkling of an eye. Turning 
into Regent Street, I entered the first restaurant I 
came across and sat down with a pint of champagne. 
Every minute I kept looking at the clock. Ten 
minutes seemed to me ten hours. No sooner did the 
half-hour strike than I opened my pocket-case, and 
what I saw cured me at one stroke from the effects 
of both love and champagne. The card was there, 
hut the sovereigns were not. On the back of the 
card the following words were written in a beautiful 
feminine hand : ‘Man’s money is much more 
necessary to me than man’s love. If you never try to 
seek me out, then you will prove yourself a real 
friend.’ 

Of course I never tried to find her, nor did I ask 
the police to do so. Probably you will be surprised 
to hear that what I felt that day was not anger, but 
pity, and that not for myself, but for her. 


Translated by Indira Devi Chaudhurani from Char-Jyari-Katha, 



MULK RAJ ANAND 
The Lost Child 

Tt was the festival of spring. From the wintry 
^ shades of narrow lanes and alleys emerged a gaily 
clad humanity, thick as a crowd of bright-coloured 
rabbits issuing from a warren. They entered the flooded 
sea of sparkling silver sunshine outside the city gates 
and sped towards the fair. Some walked, some rode on 
horses, others sat, being carried in bamboo and bullock 
carts. One little boy ran between his father’s legs, 
brimming over with life and laughter. The joyous 
morning gave greetings and unashamed invitations 
to all to come away into the fields, full of flowers 
and songs. 

‘Come, child, come,’ called his parents, as he 
lagged behind, fascinated by the toys in the shops that 
lined the way. 

He hurried towards his parents, his feet obedient 
to their call, his eyes still lingering on the receding 
toys. As he came to where they had stopped to wait 
for him he could not suppress the desire of his heart, 
ev^n though he well knew the old, cold stare of refusal 
in their eyes. 

‘I want that toy,’ he pleaded. 

His father looked at him red-eyed, in his familiar 
tyrant’s way. His mother, melted by the free spirit 
of the day, was tender, and, giving him her finger 
to hold, said : ‘Look, child, what is before you.’ 

The faint disgust of the child’s unfulfilled desire 
had hardly been quelled in the heavy, pouting sob 
of a breath, ‘M-o-th-e-r,’ when the pleasure of 



28 


MULK RAJ ANAND 

what was before him filled his eager eyes. They had 
left the dusty road on which they had walked so far. 
It wended its weary way circuitously to the north. 
They had come upon a footpath in a field. 

It was a flowering mustard-field, pale, like melting 
gold as it swept across miles and miles of even 
land — a. river of yellow liquid light, ebbing and falling 
with each fresh eddy of wild wind, and straying in 
places into broad rich tributary streams, yet running 
in a constant sunny sweep towards the distant mirage 
of an ocean of silver light. Where it ended, on one 
side stood a cluster of low, mud- walled houses, thrown 
into relief by a dense crowd of yellow-robed men 
and women from which arose a high-pitched 
sequence of whistling, creaking, squeaking, roaring, 
humming noises, sweeping across the groves to the 
blue-throated sky like the weird sound of Siva’s mad 
laughter. 

The child looked up to his father and mother, 
saturated with the shrill joy and wonder of this vast 
glory, and feeling that they, too, wore the evidence of 
this pure delight in their faces, he left the footpath and 
plimged headlong into the field, prancing like a young 
colt, his small feet timing with the fitful gusts of 
wind that came rich with the fragrance of more distant 
fields. 

A group of dragonflies were bustling about on 
their gaudy, purple wings, intercepting the flight of 
a lone black bee or butterfly in search of sweetness 
from the flowers. The child followed them in 
the air with his gaze, till one of them would still 
its wings and rest, and he would try to catch it. 
But it would go fluttering, flapping, up into the 



29 


THE LOST CHILD 

air," when he had almost caught it in his hands. One 
bold black bee, having evaded capture, sought to 
tempt him by whining round his ezr and nearly 
settled on his lips, when his mother gave a cautionary 
call : ‘Gome, child, come, come on to the footpath/ 

He ran towards his parents gaily and walked abreast 
of them for a while, being, however, soon left behind 
again, attracted by the little insects and worms 
along the footpath that were teeming out from their 
hiding-places to enjoy the sunshine. 

‘Come, child, come,’ his parents called from the 
shade of a grove where they had seated themselves 
on the edge of a well. He ran towards them. 

An old banyan here outstretched its powerful 
arms over the blossoming jack and jaman and neem 
and champak and serisha and cast its shadows across 
clusters of golden cassia and crimson gulmuhr as an 
old grandmother spreads her skirts over her young 
ones. JBut the blushing blossoms freely offered their 
adoration to the Sun, in spite of their protect- 
ing chaperon, by half covering themselves, and 
the sweet perfume of their pollen mingled with the 
soft, cool breeze that came and went in little puffs, 
only to be wafted aloft by a stronger breeze. 

A shower of young flowers fell upon the child as he 
entered the grove, and, forgetting his parents, he 
began to gather the raining petals in his hands. 
But lo ! he heard the cooing of the doves and ran 
towards his parents, shouting : ‘The dove ! The 
dove !’ The raining petals dropped from his for- 
gotten hands. A curious look was in his parents’ 
faces till a koel struck out a note of love and released 
their pent-up souls. 



30 MULK RAJ ANAND 

‘Come, child, come !’ they called to the child, 
who had now gone running in wild capers round 
the banyan tree, and gathering him up they took the 
narrow, winding footpath which led to the fair through 
the mustard-fields. 

As they neared the village the child could see many 
other footpaths full of throngs, converging to the 
whirlpool of the fair, and felt at once repelled and 
fascinated by the confusion of the world he was entering. 

A sweetmeat-seller hawked : ‘Gulab-jaman, rasgulla, 
burfi, jalebi!’ at the comer of the entrance, and a 
crowd pressed round his counter at the foot of an 
architecture of many-coloured sweets, decorated with 
leaves of silver and gold. The child stared open-eyed 
and his mouth watered for the burfi that was his 
favourite sweet. T want that burfi,’ he slowly 
murmured. But he half knew as he begged that his 
plea would not be heeded because his parents would 
say he was greedy. So without waiting for an, answer 
he moved on. 

A flower-seller hawked: ‘A garland of gulmuhr, 
a garland of gulmuhr!’ The child seemed irresistibly 
drawn by the implacable sweetness of the scents that 
came floating on the wings of the languid air. He 
went towards the basket where the flowers lay heaped 
and half murmured, T want that garland.’ But he 
well knew his parents would refuse to buy him those 
flowers because they would say they were cheap. So 
without waiting for an answer he moved on. 

A man stood holding a pole with yellow^, red, 
green and purple balloons flying from it. The child 
was carried away by the rainbow glory of their silken 
colours, and filled with an overwhelming desire to 



THE LOST CHILD 


31 


possess them all. But he well knew his parents 
would never buy him the balloons because they 
would say he was too old to play with such toys. So 
he walked on farther. 

A juggler stood playing a flute to a snake which 
coiled itself in a basket, its head raised in a graceful 
bend like the neck of a swan, while the music stole 
into its invisible ears like the gentie rippling of a 
miniature waterfall. The child went towards the 
juggler. But knowing his parents had forbidden him 
to hear such coarse music as the jugglers played, he 
proceeded farther. 

There was a roundabout in fiill swing. Men, 
women and children, carried away in awhirlingmotion, 
shrieked and cried with dizzy laughter. The child 
watched them intently going round and round, a 
pink blush of a smile on his face, his eyes rippling with 
the same movement, his lips parted in amazement, 
till he felt that he himself was being carried round. The 
ring seemed to go fiercely at first, then gradually it 
began to move less fast. Presently the child, rapt, 
finger in mouth, beheld it stop. This time, before 
his overpowering love for the anticipated sensation 
of movement had been chilled by the thought of his 
parents’ eternal denial, he made a bold request ; T 
want to go on the roundabout, please, father, mother !’ 

There was no reply. He turned to look at his 
parents. They were not there, ahead of him. He 
turned to look on either side. They were not there. 
He looked behind. There was no sign of them. 

A full, deep cry rose within his dry throat and 
with a sudden jerk of his body he ran from where 
he stood, crying in red fear, ‘Mother, father !’ Tears 



32 MULK RAJ ANAND 

rolled down from his eyes, hot and fierce; his 
flushed face was convulsed with fear. Panic-stricken, 
he ran to one side first, then to the other, hither and 
thither in all directions, knowing not where to go. 
‘Mother, father !’ he wailed, with a moist, shrill 
breath now, his throat being wet with swallowing 
his spittle. His yellow turban came untied and 
his clothes, wet with perspiration, became muddy 
where the dust had mixed with the sweat of his body. 
His light firame seemed heavy as a mass of lead. 

Having run to and fro in a rage of running 
for a while he stood defeated, his cries suppressed 
into sobs. At little distances on the green grass he 
could see, through his filmy eyes, men and women 
talking. He tried to look intently among the 
patches of bright yellow clothes, but there was no 
sign of his father and mother among these people, who 
seemed to laugh and talk just for the sake of laughing 
and talking. 

He ran hotly again, this time to a shrine to which 
people seemed to be crowding. Every little inch 
of space here was congested with men but he ran 
through people’s legs, his little sob lingering: ‘Mother, 
father!’ Near the entrance to the temple, however, 
the crowd became very thick : men jostled each 
other, heavy men, with flashing, murderous eyes and 
hefty shoulders. The poor child struggled to thrust 
a way between their feet but, knocked to and fro by 
their brutal movements, he might have been trampled 
underfoot had he not shrieked at the highest pitch of 
his voice, ‘Fa-ther, mother !’ A man in the surging 
crowd heard his cry and, stooping with very great 
difficulty, lifted him up in his arms. , 



THE LOST CHILD 


33 


‘How did you get here, child ? Whose baby zire 
you ?’ the man asked as he steered clear of the mass. 
The child wept more bitterly than ever now and only 
cried : T want my mother, I want my father !’ 

The man tried to soothe him by taking him up to 
the roundabout. ‘Will you have a ride on the horse ?’ 
he gently asked as he approached the ring. The 
child’s throat tore into a thousand shrill sobs and he 
only shouted : ‘I want my mother, I want my father !’ 

The man headed towards the place where the 
juggler still played on the flute to the dancing cobra. 
‘Listen to that nice music, child,’ he pleaded. But 
the child shut his ears with his Angers and shouted 
his double-pitched strain : ‘I want my mother, I want 
my father !’ The man took him near the balloons, 
thinking their bright colours would distract the 
child’s attention and quieten him. ‘Would you like a 
rainbow-coloured balloon ?’ he asked persuasively. 
But the child turned his eyes from the flying balloons 
and just sobbed ; ‘I want my mother, I want my father.’ 

The man, still importunate in his kindly desire 
to make the child happy, bore him to the gate where 
the flower-seller sat. ‘Look ! Can you smell those 
nice flowers, child ? Would you like a garland to put 
round your neck ?’ The child turned his nose away 
from the basket and reiterated his sob : ‘I want my 
mother, I want my father.’ 

Thinking to humour his disconsolate charge by a 
gift of sweets, the man took him to the counter of 
the sweet shop. ‘What sweets would you like, child ?’ 
he asked. 

The child turned his face from the sweet shop and 
only sobbed : ‘I want my mother, I want my father.’ 



RAJA RAO 
Javni 

Caste and caste and caste, you say, 

What caste has he who knoweth God ? 

Kanakadas 

T HAD just arrived. My sister sat by me, talking 
to me about a thousand things — about my healthy 
my studies, my future, about Mysore, about my 
younger sister — and I lay sipping the hot, hot coffee 
that seemed almost a nectar after a ten-mile cycle ride 
on one of those bare, dusty roads of Malkad. 
I half listened to her and half drowsed away, feeling 
comfort and freedom after nine wild months in a city. 
And when I finished my coffee, I asked my sister 
to go and get another cup ; for I really felt like being 
alone, and also I wanted some more of that invigorat- 
ing drink. When my sister was gone, I lay on the 
mat, flat on my face with my hands stretched at my 
sides. It seemed to me I was carried away by a 
flood of some sort, caressing, feathery and quiet. 
I slept. Suddenly, as if in a dream, I heard a door 
behind me creaking. But I did not move. The 
door did not open completely, and somebody seemed 
to be standing by the threshold afraid to come in. 
‘Perhaps a neighbour,’ I said to myself vaguely, and 
in my drowsiness I muttered something, stretched out 
my hands, kicked my feet against the floor and slowly 
moved my head from one side to the other. The 
door creaked a little, and the figure seemed to recede. 
‘Lost!’ I said to myself. Perhaps I had sent a 



JAVNI 35 

neighbour away. I was a little pained. But some 
deeper instinct told me that the figure was not gone. 
Outside the carts tumbled over the paved street, and 
some crows cawed across the roof. A few sunbeams 
stealing through the tiles fell upon my back. I felt 
happy. 

Meanwhile my sister came in, bringing the coffee. 
‘Ramu,’ she whispered, standing by me. ‘Ramu, my 
child, are you awake or asleep ?’ 

‘Awake,’ I said, turning my head towards the door, 
which creaked again and shut itself completely. 

‘Sita’, I whispered, ‘there was somebody at the door.’ 

‘When?’ she demanded loudly. 

‘Now ! Only a moment ago.’ 

She went to the door and, opening it, looked toward 
the street. After a while she smiled and called ‘Javni 1 
You monkey ! Why don’t you come in ? Who do 
you think is here, Javni ? My brother — ^my brother. - 
She smiled broadly, and a few tears rolled down her 
cheeks. 

‘Really, Mother !’ said a timid voice. ‘Really f 
I wanted to come in. But, seeing Ramappa fast 
asleep, I thought I’d better wait out here.’ She 
spoke the peasant Kannada, drawling the vowels 
interminably. 

‘So,’ I said to myself, ‘she already knows my 
name.’ 

‘Gome in !’ commanded my sister. 

Javni slowly approached the threshold, but still 
stood outside, gazing as if I were a saint or the holy 
elephant. 

‘Don’t be shy,^^come in,’ commanded my sister 
again. 

4 



36 


ElAJARAO 

Javni entered and, walking as if in a temple, went 
and sat by a sack of rice. 

My sister sat by me, proud and affectionate, j 
was everything to her — ^her strength and hope. She 
touched my head and said, ‘Ramu, Javrd is our new 
servant.’ I turned toward Javni. She seemed to 
hide her face. 

She was past forty, a little wrinkled beneath the 
lips and with strange, rapturous eyes. Her hair was 
turning white and her bare, broad forehead showed 
pain and widowhood. ‘Gome near, Javni,’ I said. 

‘No, Ramappa,’ she whispered. 

‘No, come along,’ I insisted. She came forward 
a few steps and sat by the pillar. 

‘Oh, come nearer, Javni, and see what a beautiful 
brother I have,’ cried Sita. 

I was not flattered. Only my big, taplike nose and 
my thick underlip seemed more monstrous than ever. 

Javni crawled along till she was a few steps nearer. 

‘Oh ! come nearer, you monkey,’ cried my sister 
again. 

Javni advanced a few feet more and, turning her 
face toward the floor, sat like a bride beside the bride- 
groom. 

'He looks a prince, Javni !’ cried my sister. 

‘A god !’ mumbled Javni, 

I laughed and drank my coffee. 

‘The whole town is mad about him,’ whispered 
Javni. 

‘How do you know ?’ asked Sita. 

‘How ! I have been standing at the market-place, 
the whole afternoon, to see when Ramappa would 
come. You told me he looked like a prince. You 



JAVNI 37 

said he rode a bicycle. And, when I saw him come 
by the pipal tree where-the-fisherman-Kodi-hanged- 
himself-the-other-day, I ran toward the town and I 
observed how people gazed and gazed at him. And 
they asked me who it was. “Of course, the Revenue 
Inspector’s brother-in-law,” I replied. “How beauti- 
ful he is !” said fat Nanjundah of the coconut shop. 
*‘How like a prince he is !” said the concubine Ghowdy. 
“Oh, a very god !” said my neighbour, barber 
Venka’s wife Kenchi.’ 

‘Well, Ramu, so you see, the whole of Malkad is 
dazzled with your beauty,’ interrupted my sister. 
‘Take care, my child. They say, in this town they 
practise ma^c, and I have heard many a beautiful 
boy has been killed by jealousy.’ 

I laughed. 

‘Don’t laugh, Ramappa. With these very eyes, 
with these very two eyes, I have seen the ghosts of 
more than a hundred young men and women — all 
killed by magic, by magic, Ramappa,’ assured Javni, 
for the first time looking toward me. ‘My learned 
Ramappa, Ramappa, never go out after sunset ; 
for there are spirits of all sorts walking in the dark. 
Especially never once go by the canal after the 
cows are come home. It is a haunted place, 
Ramappa.’ 

‘How do you know ?’ I asked, curious. 

‘How ! With these very eyes, I have seen, Ram- 
appa, with these very eyes. The potter’s wife Rangi 
was iinhappy. Poor thing ! Poor thing ! And one 
night she was so, so sad that she went and jumped 
into the canal. The other day, when I was coming 
home in the deadly dark with my little lamb, whom 



38 


RAJA RAO 

should I see blit Rang! — Rang! in a white, white 
sari, her hair all floating. She stood in front of 
me. I shivered and wept. She ran and stood by a 
tree, yelling in a strange voice “Away ! Away !” 
I cried. Then suddenly I saw her standing on the 
bridge, and she jumped into the canal, moaning : 
“My girl is gone, my child is gone, and I am gone 
too !”’ 

My sister trembled. She had a horror of devils. 
‘Why don’t you shut up, you donkey’s widow, and 
not pour out aU your Vedantic knowledge ?’ 

‘Pardon me. Mother, pardon me,’ she begged. 

‘I have pardoned you again and again, and yet 
it is the same old story. Always the same Ramayana. 
Why don’t you fall into the well like Rangi and turn 
devil ?’ My sister was furious. 

Javni smiled and hid her face between her knees, 
timidly. ‘How beautiful your brother is !’ she mur- 
mured after a moment, ecstatic. 

‘Did I not say he was like a prince ! Who knows 
what incarnation of a god he may be ? Who knows ?’ 
my sister whispered, patting me, proudly, religiously. 

‘Sita !’ I replied, and touched her lap with tender- 
ness. 

‘Without Javni I could never have lived in this 
damned place !’ said my sister after a moment’s 
silence. 

. ‘And without you, I could not have lived either, 
Mother !’ Her voice was so calm and rich that she 
seemed to sing. 

‘In this damned place everything is so difiicult/ 
cursed ^ Sita. ‘ife is always struggling with, the 
^ofl^tionsj; The. village ?ire fe'^, but.lplafced at[ 



JAVNI 39 

great distances from one another. Sometimes he 
has been away for more than a week, and I should 
have died of fright had not Javni been with me. 
‘And’, she whispered, a little sadly, ‘Javni, I am 
sure, understands mf fears, my beliefs. Men, Ramu, 
can never understand us.’ 

‘Why ?’ I asked. 

‘Why ? I cannot say. You are too practical and 
too irreligious. To us everything is mysterious. Our 
gods are not your gods, your gods not our gods. It 
is a simple affair.’ She seemed sadder still. 

‘But yet, I have always tried to understand you,’ 
I managed to whisper. 

‘Of course, of course !’ cried my sister rapturously. 

‘Mother,’ muttered Javni trembling, ‘Mother ! 
will you permit me to say one thing ?’ She seemed 
to plead. 

‘Yes !’ answered my sister. 

‘Ramappa, your sister loves you,’ said Javni. 
‘She loves you as though you were her own child. 
Oh I I wish I had seen her two children ! They 
must have been angels ! Perhaps they are in Heaven 
now — in Heaven ! Children go to Heaven ! But, 
Ramappa, what I wanted to say was this. Your 
sister loves you, tal k s of you all the time, and says, 
“If my brother did not live, I should have died long 
ago . 

‘How long have you been with Sita ?’ I asked 
Javni, trying to change the subject. ' 

‘How long ? How long have I been with this 
family ? What do I know ? But let me see. The 
harvest was over and we were husking the grains 
when they came.’ 



40 RAJA RAO 

‘How did you happen to find her ?’ I asked my 
sister. 

‘Why, Ramappa,’ cried Javni, proud for the first 
time, ‘there is nobody who can^work for a Revenue 
Inspector’s family as I. You czfn go and ask every- 
body in the town, including every pariah if you like, 
and they will tell you, “Javni, she is good like a cow,” 
and they will also add that there is no one who can 
serve a big man like the Revenue Inspector as Javni — 
as I.’ She beat her breasts with satisfaction. 

‘So you are the most faithful among the servants 
here !’ I added a little awkwardly. 

‘Of course !’ she cried proudly, her hands folded 
upon her knees. ‘Of course !’ 

‘How many Revenue Inspectors have you served ?’ 

‘How many ? Now let me see.’ Here she counted 
upon her fingers, one by one, remembering them 
by how many children they had, what sort of wives 
they had, their caste, their native place, or even how 
good they had been in giving her two saris, a four- 
anna tip or a sack of rice. 

‘Javni,’ I said, trying to be a little bit humorous, 
‘suppose I come here one day, say after ten or fifteen 
or twenty years, and I am not a Revenue Inspector 
and I ask you to serve me. Will you or will yon 
not ?’ 

She looked perplexed, laughed and turned toward 
my sister for help. 

‘Answer him !’ commanded my sister affectionately. 

‘But, Ramappa,’ she cried out, full of happiness, 
as if she had discovered a solution, ‘you cannot but 
be a big man like our Master, the Revenue Inspector. 
With your learning and your beauty you cannot be 



JAVNI 41 

anything else. And, when you come here, of course 
I will be your servant.’ 

‘But if I am not a Revenue Inspector,’ I insisted. 

‘You must be — ^you must be !’ she cried, as if I 
were insulting myself. 

‘All right, I shah, be a Revenue Inspector in order 
to have you,’ I joked. 

‘As if it were not enough that I should bleed myself 
to death in being one,’ added my brother-in-law, 
as he entered through the back door, dust-covered and 
breathless. 

Javni got up and ran away as if in holy fear. It 
was the Master. 

‘She is a sweet thing,’ I said to my sister. 

‘Almost a mother !’ she added, and smiled. 

In the byre Javni was talking to the calf. 

My brother-in-law was out touring two or three 
days in the week. On these days Javni usually came 
to sleep at our house ; for my sister had a terror of 
being alone. And, since it had become a habit, Javni 
came as usual even when I was there. One evening, 
I cannot remember why, we had dined early, and 
unrolling our beds, we lay down when it was hardly 
sunset. Javixi came, peeped from the window and 
called in a whisper, ‘Mother, Mother!’ 

‘Come in, you monkey,’ answered my sister. 

Javni opened the door and stepped in. She had 
a sheet in her hand, and, throwing it on the floor, 
she went straight into the byre where her food was 
usually kept. I could not bear that. Time and 
again I had quarrelled with my sister about it. But 
she would not argue it out. ‘They are of the lower 



42 


RAJA RAO 

class, and you cannot ask them to sit and cat with 
you,’ she would say. 

‘Of course !’ I said. ‘After all, why not ? Are 
they not like us, like any of us ? Only the other 
day you said you loved her as if she were your elder 
sister or mother.’ 

‘Yes !’ she grunted angrily. ‘But affection does 
not ask you to be irreligious.’ 

, ‘And what, pray, is being irreligious ?’ I con- 
tinued, furious. 

‘Irreligious. Irreligious. Well, eating with a 
woman of a lower caste is irreligious. And, Ramu,’ 
she cried desperately, ‘I have enough of quarrelling 
all the time. In the name of- our holy mother can’t 
you leave me alone !’ There, tears ! 

‘You are inhuman, inhuman !’ I spat, disgusted. 

‘Go and show your humanity,’ she grumbled, and, 
hiding her face beneath the blanket, she wept harder. 

I was really much too ashamed and too angry 
to stay in my bed. I got up and went into the byre. 
Javni sat in the dark, swallowing mouthfuls of rice 
^at sounded like a cow chewing the cud. She thought 
I had come to go into the garden, but I remained 
beside her, leaning against the wall. She stopped 
eating and looked deeply embarrassed. 

‘Javni,’ I said tenderly. 

‘Ramappa !’ she answered, confused. 

‘Why not light a lantern when you eat, Javni ?’ 

‘What use ?’ she replied, and began to chew the cud. 

‘But you cannot see what you are eating,’ I 
explained. 

‘I cannot. But there is no necessity to see what 
you eat.’ She laughed as if amused. 



JAVNI 43 

*But you must !’ I was angry. 

‘No, Ramappa. I know where my rice is, and I 
can feel where the pickle is, and that is enough.’ 

Just at that moment, the cow threw a heapful of 
dung, which splashed across the cobbled floor. 

‘Suppose you come with me into the hall,’ I cried. 
I knew I could never convince her. 

‘No, Ramappa. I am quite well here. I do not 
want to dirty the floor of the hall.’ 

‘If it is dirty, I will clean it,’ I cried, exasperated. 

She was silent. In the darkness I saw the shadow 
of Javni near me, thrown by the faint starlight that 
came from the garden door. In the comer the cow 
was breathing hard, and the calf was nibbling at the 
wisps of hay. It was a terrible moment. The whole 
misery of the world seemed to be weighing all about 
and above me. And yet — and yet — the suffering — 
one seemed to laugh at it all. 

‘Javni,’ I said affectionately, ‘do you eat at home 
like this ?’ 

‘Yes, Ramappa.’ Her tone was sad. . 

‘And why ?’ 

‘The oil is too expensive, Ramappa.’ 

‘But surely you can buy it ?’ I continued. 

‘No, Ramappa. It costs an anna a bottle, and it 
lasts only a week.’ 

‘But an anna is nothing,’ I said. 

‘Nothing ! Nothing !’ She spoke as if frightened. 
‘Why, my learned Ramappa, it is what I earn in two 
days.’ 

‘In two days !’ I had never been more surprised. 

‘Yes, Ramappa. I earn one rupee each month.’ 
She seemed content. 



44 


RAJA RAO 

I heard an owl hoot somewhere, and far, far away, 
somewhere too far and too distant for my rude ears 
to hear, the world wept its silent suffering plaints. 
Had not the Lord said : ‘Whenever there is misery 
and ignorance, I come’ ? Oh, when will that day 
come, and when will the Conch of Knowledge blow ? 

I had nothing to say. My heart beat fast. And, 
closing my eyes, I sank into the primal flood, the 
moving fount of 'Being. Man, I love thee. 

Javni sat and ate. The mechanical mastication 
of the rice seemed to represent her life, her whole 
existence. 

‘Javni,’ I inquired, breaking the silence, ‘what 
do you do with the one rupee ?’ 

‘I never take it,’ she answered laughing. 

‘Why don’t you take it, Javni ?’ 

‘Mo^er keeps it for me. Now and again she 
sa'ys I work- well and adds an anna or two to my funds, 
and one day I shall have enough to buy a sari.’ 

‘And the rest ?’ I asked. 

‘The rest ? Why, I will buy something for my 
brother’s child.’ 

‘Is your brother poor, Javni ?’ 

‘No. But, Ramappa, I love the child.’ She 
smiled. 

‘Suppose I asked you to give it to me ?’ I laughed, 
since I could not weep. 

‘Oh, you will never ask me, Ramappa, never. 
But, Ramappa, if you should, I would give it to you.’ 
She laughed too, content and amused. 

‘You are a wonderful thing !’ I murmured. 

‘At your feet, Ramappa !’ She had finished eating, 
and she went into the bathroom to wash her hands. 



JAVNI 45. 

I walked out into the garden and stood looking 
at the sparkling heavens. There was companionship, 
in their shining. The small and the great clustered 
together in the heart of the qijiet blue. God, knew 
their caste ? Far away a cartman chanted forth : 

The right is dark ; 

Come to me, mother. 

The night is quiet ; 

Gome to me, fiiend. 

The winds sighed. 

On the nights when Javni came to sleep with us^ 
we gossiped a great deal about village affairs. She 
had always news to tell us. One day it would be 
about the postman Subba’s wife, who had run away 
with the Mohammedan of the mango shop. • On 
another day it would be about the miraculous cure 
of Sata Venkaima’s wife, Kanthi, during her recent 
pilgrimage to the BiUgiri temple. My sister always- 
took an interest in those things, and Javni made it a 
point to find out everything about everybody. She 
gossiped the whole evening till we both fell asleep.. 
My sister usually lay by the window, I near the door^ 
and Javni at our feet. She slept on a bare wattle-mat^ 
with a cotton sheet for a cover, and she seemed never 
to suffer from cold. On one of these nights when we 
were gossiping, I pleaded with Javni to tell me a 
little about her own life. At first she waved aside my 
idea ; but, after a moment, when my sister howled 
at her, she accepted it, still rather unwillingly. I 
was all ears, but my sister was soon snoring comfort- 
ably. 



4^ RAJA RAO 

Javni was born in the neighbouring village of 
Kotehallij where her father cultivated the fields in the 
winter and washed clothes in the summer. Her 
mother had always work to do, since there were child- 
births almost every day in one village or the other, 
and, being a hereditary midwife, she was always sent 
for. Javni had four sisters and two brothers, of whom 
only her brother Bhima remained. She loved her 
parents, and they loved her too ; and, when she was 
eighteen, she was duly married to a boy whom they 
had chosen from Malkad. The boy was good and 
affectionate, and he never once beat her. He too 
was a washerman, and ‘What do you think ?’ said 
Javni proudly, ‘He washed clothes for the Maharaja, 
when he came here’. 

‘Really !’ I exclaimed. 

And she continued. Her husband was, as I have 
said, a good man, and he really cared for her. He 
never made her work too much, and he always cooked 
for her when she fell sick. One day, however, as the 
gods decided it, a snake bit him while he was washing 
clothes by the river, and, in spite of all the magic that 
the barber Subba applied, he died that very evening, 
crying to the last, ‘Javni, Javni, my Javni’. (I should 
have ^pected her to wefep here. But she continued 
without any exclamations or sighs.) Then came all 
the misfortunes one after the other, and yet she knew 
they were nothing, for, above all, she said, Goddess 
Talakamma moved and reigned. 

Her husband belonged to a family of three brothers 
and two sisters. The elder brother was a wicked 
fellow, who played cards and got drunk two days out 
of three. The second was her husband, and the third 



JAVNI 47 

was a haughty young fellow, who had already, it was 
known, made friends with the concubine Siddi, the 
former mistress of the priest Rangappa. He treated 
his wife as if she were a bullock and once he actually 
beat her till she was bleeding and unconscious. There 
were many children in the family, and since one of the 
sisters-in-law also lived in the same village, her children 
too came to play in the house. So Javni lived on 
happily, worldng at home as usual and doing her 
little to earn for the family funds. 

She never knew, she said, how it all happened, 
but one day a policeman came, frightened every- 
body, and took away her elder brother-in-law for some 
reason that nobody understood. The women were 
all terrified, and everybody wept. The people in 
the town began to spit at them as they passed by, 
and left cattle to eat away all the crops in the fields 
to show their hatred and their revenge. Shame, 
poverty and quarrels, these followed one another. 
And because the elder brother-in-law was in prison 
and the younger with his mistress, the women at home 
made her life miserable. ‘ “You dirty widow !” they 
would say and spit on me. I wept and sobbed and 
often wanted to go and fall into the river. But I 
knew Goddess Talakamma would be angry with me, 
and I stopped each time I wanted to kill myself. 
One day, however, my elder sister-in-law became so 
impossible that I ran away from the house. I did 
not know to whom to go, since I knew nobody and 
my brother hated me — ^he always hated me. But 
anyway, Ramappa,’ she said, ‘anyway, a sister is a 
sister. You cannot deny that the same mother has 
suckled yott both.’ 



48 


RAJA RAO 

‘Of course not !’ I said. 

‘But he never treated me as you treat your sister.’ 
‘So, you are jealous, you ill-boding widow !’ swore 
any sister, waking up. She always thought people 
hated or envied her. 

‘No, Mother, no,’ she pleaded. 

‘Go on !’ I said. 

‘I went to my brother,’ she continued. ‘As soon 
as his wife saw me, she swore and spat and took away 
her child that was playing on the veranda, saying it 
would be bewitched. After a moment my brother 
>came out. 

‘ “Why have you come ?” he asked me. 

‘ “I am without a home,” I said. 

‘ “You dirty widow, how can you find a house to 
‘live in, when you carry misfortune wherever you 
•set your foot ?” 

‘I simply wept. 

‘ “Weep, weep !” he cried, “weep till your tears 
.flood the Gauvery. But you will not get a morsel 
of rice from me. No, not a morsel !” 

‘ “No,” I said. “I do not want a morsel of rice. 
I want only a palm-width of shelter to put myself 
under.” 

‘He seemed less angry. He looked this side and 
fthat and roared : “Do you promise me not to quarrel?” 

‘ “Yes !” I answered, still weeping. 

‘ “Then, for the peace of the spirit of my father, 
I will give you the little hut by the garden door. 
You can sit, weep, eat, shit, die — do what you like 
there,” he said. I trembled. In the meantime my 
sister-in-law came back. She frowned and thumped 
the floor, swearing at me and calling me a prostitute. 



JAVNI 49 

a donkey, a witch. Ramappa, I never saw a woman 
like that. She makes my life a life of tears.’ 

‘How ?’ I asked. 

‘How ! I cannot say. It is ten years or twenty 
since I set foot in their house. And every day I wake 
up with “donkey’s wife” or “prostitute” in my ears.’ 

‘But you don’t have anything to do with her ?’ 
1 said. 

‘I don’t. But the child sometimes comes to me 
because I lov.e it and then my sister-in-law rushes 
out, roaring like a tigress, and says she will skin me 
to death if I touch the child again.’ 

‘You should not touch it,’ I said. 

‘Of course I would not if I had my own. But, 
Ramappa, that child loves me.’ 

‘And why don’t they want you to touch it ?’ 

‘Because they say I am a witch and an evil spirit.’ 
She wept. 

‘Who says it ?’ 

‘They. Both of them say it. But still, Ramappa’ — 
here she suddenly turned gay — ‘I always keep mangoes 
and cakes that Mother gives me and save them all 
for the child. So it runs away from its mother each 
time the door is open. It is such a sweet, sweet thing.’ 
She was happy. 

‘How old is it ?’ I asked. 

‘Four.’ 

‘Is that their only child ?’ 

‘No. They have four more — aU grown up. One 
is already a boy as big as you.’ 

‘And the others, do they love you ?’ 

‘No. They all hate me, they all hate me — except 
that child.’ 



50 


RAJA RAO 

‘Why don’t you adopt a child ?’ 

‘No, Ramappa I have a lamb, and that is enough.’ 
‘You have a lamb too !’ I said, surprised. 

‘Yes, a lamb for the child to play with now, and, 
when the next Durga festival comes, I will offer it to 
Goddess Talakamma.’ 

‘Offer it to the Goddess ! Why, Javni? Why not 
let it live ?’ 

‘Don’t speak sacrilege, Ramappa. I owe a lamb 
every three years to the Goddess.’ 

‘Amd what does she give in return ?’ 

‘What ! What !’ She was angry. ‘All ! Every- 
thing ! Should I live if that Goddess did not protect 
me ? Would that child come to me if the Goddess 
did not help me ? Would Mother be so good to me 
if the Goddess did not bless me ? Why, Ramappa, 
everything is hers. O Great Goddess Talakamma, 
give everybody good health and long life and all 
the joys ! Protect me. Mother !’ She was praying. 

‘What will she give me if I offer a lamb ?’ I asked. 

‘Everything, Ramappa, You will grow learned ; 
you will become a big man ; you will marry a rich 
wife, Ramappa,’ she said, growing affectionate 
all of a sudden, ‘I have already been praying for 
you. When Mother said she had a brother, I said 
to the Goddess ; “Goddess, keep that boy strong and 
virtuous and give him all the eight joys of Heaven 
and earth”.’ 

‘Do you love me more or less than your brother’s 
child ?’ I asked, to change the subject. 

She was silent for a moment.' 

‘You-don’t know ?’ I said. 

‘No, Ramappa. I have been thinking. I offer 



JAVNI 51 

the lamb to the Goddess for the sake of the child. 
I have not offered a lamb for you, So*how can I 
say whom I love more ?’ 

‘The child !’ I said. 

‘No, no, I love you as much, Ramappa.’ 

‘Will you adopt me ?’ No, I was not joking. 

She broke into fits of laughter which woke up 
my sister. 

‘Oh, shut up !’ cried Sita. 

‘Do you know Javni is going to adopt me ?’ 

‘Adopt you ! Why does she not go and fall into 
the river ?’ she roared, and went to sleep again. 

‘If you adopt me, Javni, I will work for you and 
give you food to eat.’ 

‘No, learned Ramappa. A Brahmin is not meant 
to work. You are the “chosen ones”.’ 

Chosen ones, indeed ! ‘No, we are not !’ I mur- 
mured. 

‘You are. You are. The sacred books are yours. 
The Vedas are yours. You are all, you are all, you 
are the twice-bom. We are your servants, Ram- 
appa— your slaves.’ 

‘I am not a Brahmin,’ I said half-jokingly, half- 
seriously. 

‘You are. You are. You want to make fun of 
me.’ 

‘No, Javni, suppose you adopt me ?’ 

She laughed again. 

‘If you do not adopt me, I shall die now and grow 
into a lamb in my next life and you will buy- it. What 
will you do then ?’ 

She did not say anything. It was too perplexing. 

‘Now,’ I said, feeling sleepy, ‘now, Javni, go to 

5 



52 RAJA RAO 

sleep and think again tomorrow morning whether 
you will adopt me or not.’ 

‘Adopt you ! You. are a god, Ramappa, a god ! 
And I cannot adopt you.’ 

I dozed away. Only in the stillness I heard Javni 
saying : ‘Goddess, Great Goddess, as I vowed, I will 
offer thee my lamb. Protect the child, protect 
Mother, protect her brother, protect Master, O 
Goddess ! Protect me !’ 

The Goddess stood silent, in the little temple by 
the Cauvery, amidst the whisper of the woods. 

A July morning, two summers later. Our cart 
rumbled over the boulders of the street, and we were 
soon at the village square. Javni was running behind 
the cart, with tears rolling down her cheeks. For 
one full week I had seen her weeping all the time, 
all the time, dreading the day when we should leave 
her and she would see us no more. She was breathless. 
But she walked fast, keeping pace with the bullocks. 
I was with my sister in the back of the cart, and my 
brother-in-law sat in front, beside the cartman. My 
sister too was sad. In her heart she knew she was 
leaving a friend. Yes. Javni had been her friend, 
her only friend. Now and agsiin they gazed at each 
other, and I could see Javni suddenly sobbing like 
a child. 

‘Mother, Mother,’ she would say, approaching 
the cart, ‘don’t forget me.’ 

‘I will not. No, I assure you, I will not.’ 

Now my sister too was in tears. 

‘Even if she should, I will not,’ I added. I myself 
should have wept had I not been so citdlized. 



JAVNI 5S 

When we touched the river, it was already broad 
morning. Now, in the summer, there was so litde 
water that the ferry was not plying and we were 
going to wade through. The cartman said he would 
rest the bullocks for a moment, and I got out partly 
to breathe the fresh air and more to speak to Javni. 

‘Don’t weep,’ I said to her. 

‘Ramappa, how can I help but weep ? Shall 
I ever see again a family of gods like yours ? Mother 
was kind to me, kind like a veritable goddess. You 
were so, so good to me, and Master — ’ Here she broke 
again into sobs. 

‘No, Javni. In contact with a heart like yours, 
who will not bloom into a god ?’ 

But she simply wept. My words meant nothing 
to her. She was nervous, and she trembled over and 
over again. ‘Mother, Mother,’ she would say between 
her sobs, ‘O Mother !’ 

The cartman asked me to get in. I got into the 
cart with a heavy heart. I was leaving a most 
wonderful soul. I was in. The cartman cried, 
‘Hoy, hoyee!’. And the bulls stepped into the river. 

Till we were on the other baiik, I could see Javni 
sitting on a rock and looking toward us. In my 
heart I seemed still to hear her sobs. A huge pipal 
rose behind her, and, across the blue waters of the 
river and the vast, vast sky above her, she seemed 
so small, so insignificant. And yet, she was one of 
them— much more at least, dear reader, than you 
and I. 



R. K. NARAYAN 
Half-a-Rupee Worth 

QUBBiAH sold rice at the market gate. In his 
*^shop you found, heaped in wicker baskets, all 
varieties of rice from pebbly coarse rice to Delhi Samba, 
white as jasmine and slender as a.ne,edle. His shop 
was stuffy and dark, but there was no place on earth 
like it for him. He loved every inch of it. He liked 
the smell of gunny sack, he liked the smell of rice 
and husk, and he loved the warm feel of rice in his 
basket when it arrived fresh from the mill. Through 
good times and bad times he flourished. 

There were days of drought when paddy did not 
come up and the rice mills were silenced ; when 
people looked hollow-eyed and seemed at the point of 
falling dead on the roadside. But even then he did 
not close his shop. If he did not find stuff for 20 
baskets, he scoured the countryside and fiUed at least 
two baskets, and sold them. There were times when 
the harvest was so rich that he could hardly accept a 
quarter of the grain that was offered ; when it seemed 
a fool’s business to be selling rice. If you sold rice 
all day and night you could not hope for a profit of 
even Rs 50 at the end of the month. They called 
it ‘depression in the trade’. 

The God of Harvest seemed a most eccentric and 
difficult patron. His bounty was as unacceptable 
as his parsimony. But Subbiah survived all the 
ups and downs in the harvest and trade. Rice was 
in his blood. He had served as a sort of unpaid shop 
assistant when his father sat at the sloping desk and 



HALF-A-RUPEE WORTH 55 

coiinted cash. Those were days when Subbiah 
loathed the rice bags which hemmed him in at the 
shop ; he longed for the crowded streets, cinemas, 
football matches, and wrestling tournaments, which 
he glimpsed through the crowded shop -door But 
his father more or less kept him chained to the shop 
and discouraged all his other interests in life, saying, 

^ Young fellows after ten should be horse- whipped 
if they are not to become brigands.’ He practised 
this theory of child-training with such steadfastness 
that in due course the little man had no eyes for 
anything in life except rice and no head for anything 
-except the price of grain, and he dreamt of rice and 
thought of rice and spoke of rice. 

When his father died he filled his place so nicely 
that nobody could notice the difference : most 
people thought that the old man was still there counting 
■cash. Business prospered. Subbiah kept five cows 
and buffaloes at home, whose milk, ctirds and butter, 
he and his wife and five children consumed day and 
night and became rotund and balloon-like. He 
•owned a few acres of land in a nearby village, and he 
went there once in six months to survey his possessions 
and to make sure they were intact. He lent money 
at an exorbitant rate of interest to desperate persons, 
and thus acquired dozens of houses ; and their rents 
poured into his savings bank account every month. 
He became swollen with money. 

He sent his children to a school, bought them 
'brocaded caps and velvet coats, and paid a home- 
tutor to shout at the top of his voice to them every 
•day under a lamp in the hall. He loaded his wife 
with heavy gold ornaments and draped her in gaudy 



56 


R. K. NARAYAN 


Banaras silk ; he added on to his house two more 
storeys and several halls and painted all the walls 
with a thick blue oil paint, and covered them with 
hundreds of pictures of gods in gilt frames. 

All day he sat by his iron safe and kept shoving into 
it money, watching with one eye his assistants measur- 
ing out rice into gimny sacks ; it was a completely 
satisfying and tranquil existence, the only break from 
rice-selling and coin-counting being the hours of 
sleep. There seemed to be no reason why it should 
not go on till eternity — the same set of activities and 
interests, going on and on, money piling up and rice 
coming in and going out, then one or the other of 
his sons to acquire his shape and appearance and 
continue the work. 

This seemed, for all practical purposes, a region 
beyond life, death, and change. It might have been 
so but for the war. It frightened him. It seemed 
at first to be the end of all things. But after the first 
shock was over, it seemed not so bad after all. His 
profits piled up as never before — Saigon and Burma 
ceased to send rice and it meant the stock he held was 
worth its weight in gold. People flocked into his 
shop at all hours, and the door of the iron szife could 
hardly be pushed in. He bought the big house next 
to his for a godown and then the next one and the 
next ; and he bought a dozen more villages .... 
He loaded more gold on his wife and daughters and 
increased his own girth. 

War seemed, on the whole, a very beneficial force — 
till Food Control came in. For the first time in his 
life he was baffled and worried. He could not see 



57 


fiALF-A-RUPEE WORTH 

how anyone had the right to say what he should sell 
and for how much. He raved night and day to a set 
of his admiring friends and assistants : ‘Sircar, what 
do they know of this business ? Let them content 
themselves with tax-collection, catching thieves, and 
putting up drains. What do they know of the rice 
business ?’ His greatest joy was when someone or 
other remarked, ‘The Food Department is a hoax. 
The Government is making a mess of things . . . . ’ He 
agreed heartily with them and implored, ‘Can’t some 
educated persons like you make representations to 
the Government in the assemblies ? It’s disgrace- 
ful.’ 

He soon foxmd that he could still survive but only 
needed a new garb to go under. By waiting before 
officials, and seeing people, and filling up forms, he 
was soon allowed to continue his business as a Fair 
Price Grain Depot. Still it seemed a poor substitute 
for his old trade. He groaned unhappily when 
he learnt that he should surrender all the rice that his 
peasants laboriously cultivated in his village fields. 
The whole thing seemed to him atrocious. ‘They 
have to fix the price for my produce ! They have to 
give me permission to take what I myself produce !’ 
The scheme seemed to him extremely ^anniced. 
But he accepted the position without much outward 
protest. 

But his cunning brain was already at work. No 
cunning brain has ever worked and failed to produce 
results. He slept little and lost the taste for food. 
All through the dark nights his mind dwelt on the 
problem. Finally it emerged with a solution. He 
said to himself, T still have my rice in the fields, and 



58 


R. K. NARAYAN 


I still have the bags in my godown. If I can’t use 
my wits and keep my hands on these I might as well 
perish. After all what does the Government want ? 
To have things in nice shape on paper ; that they 
shall have.’ 

It involved some intricate work, but it was worth 
it. He retained all the rice he wanted, for sale and 
.personal use, but out of sight and out of paper. He 
had to give away a lot of money to people who were 
entitled to examine his stock and accounts : but 
he never grudged this investment. If he passed a 
ten-rupee currency note on such an occasion, it meant 
he had screened from prying eyes a hundred or 
thousand rupees’ worth of grain. People were pre- 
pared to pay any price ungrudgingly. He was the 
sole master of prices. When he bought of it, he 
said to himself that all controls and restrictions were 
really a boon. He reflected philosophically : ‘God 
arranges everything for the best’. He distributed 
a few annas for charity twice a week, and broke a 
coconut at the temple on Fridays in appreciation oi 
God’s interest in his affairs. 

Gradually, with experience, as his technique 
developed, he became a master of his situation. At 
.his depot, he measured out rice with a deft hand, so 
that at the end of a day a considerable quantity 
accumulated which was nobody’s ; and then he 
delayed and opened and closed and re-opened his 
shop in such a manner that people had to come to 
him several times before they could get any rice out 
of him : when they had money he had no stock, 
or when he had rice they had no mpney. 

.By all this manipulation, he went on accumulating 



59 


HALF-A-RUPEE WORTH 

a vast quantity of rice every week ; and then of his 
village harvest only a small portion reached the Food 
Department. Very soon he converted one of his 
houses in a back street into a godown and there piled 
up rice bags from floor to ceiling. It was supposed 
to be a store for paper and rags, which, he gave out, 
he gathered for the paper mills. ‘Something to eke 
out my meagre livelihood,’ he explained. 

He never sold his rice except in small quantities, 
and to known customers. He took their cash in 
advance, and asked them to call later. He always 
threw in a doubt : ‘There was a person who had a 
little rice, I don’t know if he still has it. Anyway, 
leave the cash with me.’ Sometimes, he later returned 
the money, just to give a. realistic touch with, 
‘Sorry, not available, the man said he had it, but 
you know we can never count on these things 
nowadays.’ 

One evening as he just closed his shop and started 
out with the key in his pocket, a person halted before 
him and said, ‘Oh ! You have closed — just my luck — 
Subbiah usually ignored people who spoke to him in 
the streets ; he always avoided such encounters 
because people sought him only for one object — that 
was to ask for rice. He felt disgusted with all that 
clamour for rice. Why can’t they eat maize or millet 
instead of asking for ‘Rice, Rice,’ all day when 
it was not available? Most people could not afford 
to pay for rice, just as all people could not afford to 
possess gold. 

‘I have another business now ; no time to stop and 
talk — ’ said Subbiah. He passed on ceremoniously. 
The other trotted behind him. He held him by the 



60 


R. K. NARAYAN 


arm and cried, ‘You must open your shop and get 
me rice. I can’t let you go.’ 

Subbiah was stopped by the fervour of the other’s 
speech. ‘My two children are crying for food and 
my old mother is nearly on the point of collapse. 
They’ve been starving. My ration was exhausted 
three days ago. I can’t see them in that condition 
any more. Please somehow give me some rice. 
I have gone round and roimd the whole town 
today — ^but I couldn’t get a grain anywhere- At 
home they will be thinking I’m returning with 
something. They will . . . God knows what they’ll 
do when they see me go back empty-handed.’ 

‘How much do you want ?’ 

‘Give me a seer. There are six mouths to feed 
at home.’ 

Subbiah looked at him with- disgust. ‘Why couldn’t 
you have come earlier ?’ 

‘I was going round, and this is the last place.’ 

‘How much have you ?’ 

The other held up a half-rupee coin. 

Subbiah looked at the coin with disgust. ‘You 
expect to get one seer for this ?’ 

‘But it’s three seers for a rupee ? Isn’t it ?’ 

‘Don’t talk of all that now. You will starve if 
you talk of controlled price and such other nonsense.’ 
He was enraged. People clung to silly notions even 
when they were starving. ‘If you give another eight 
annas, perhaps you may get a seer,’ said Subbiah. 

The other shook his head dolefully. ‘This is the end 
of the month, you see ; this is all I have.’ 

‘You will get only half a seer, that’s the price a man 
I know will demand.’ 



HALF-A-RUPEE WORTH 61 

‘AH right,’ the other said with resignation. ‘Better 
than nothing.’ 

‘Give the coin here,’ said Subbiah. He took the 
coin. ‘Don’t follow me : that fellow is extraordinarily 
suspicious. HewiU say “No” if he sees anyone except 
me. You wait here. I wiU be back. But I can’t 
promise. If he says “No” it wiU be just your luck, 
that is all. Give the coin.’ 

He was gone with the eight annas and the other 
stood at the street corner. ‘How long shall I have tO' 
be here ?’ he wanted to ask as Subbiah’s back was 
turned ; but checked himself for fear of irritating 
him. The man now wished he had cleared the point, 
for three hours had gone by and stiU there was no 
sign of Subbiah. The night had deepened, traffic 
had thinned, and people were moving about like 
shadows. Silence descended on the town. The 
man began to mutter several times to himself, ‘WeU, 
what has happened ? Where is he ? Where has he 
gone ? When am I to go home and cook the rice? The 
children, ah, the children — .’ He turned and walked 
in the direction the other had gone — ^but that took him 
nowhere, because the other had pretended to go that 
way in order not to show where his secret godown was, 
but had turned and gone off in another direction. 

The man wandered up and down a little through 
the silent streets and then went up to the other’s 
shop, hoping he might be there. He wasn’t there 
either. The lock was still on the door, just as he 
had seen it before. He was so puzzled that he wander- 
ed aimlessly a little longer, and then caUed at Subbiah’s 
house, He knocked on the door. Subbiah’s wife 
opened the door, remarking from inside, ‘You are so 



^2 


R. K. NARAYAN 


late today . . / She checked herself as soon as 
ishe saw the stranger and drew back* 

‘Is Subbiah at home ?’ 

‘No — ^he didn’t come home at all.’ She looked 
very anxious. 

By 6 a.m. they became nervous, and in that condition 
she could not help saying, ‘Have you looked for him 
at the other godown ?’ 

‘Where is it ?’ 

She had to tell, being the only person who knew 
its whereabouts. They started out. After going 
through some by-lanes, they came up to the building. 
The door was bolted inside. They knocked on it. 
But the house was constructed for safety from intruders, 
and even rats could not enter except in the right royal 
manner. Finally, they had to break open the front 
ventilator, slip through it, and then have the main 
door opened. 

A faint morning light came in through the broken 
ventilator. In a corner they saw an electric torch lying 
on the floor and then a half-rupee coin, and a little off 
it a hand, which stuck out of a pile of fallen bags .... 

It is best that we leave our Subbiah at this point. 
At the inquest they said, ‘Death due to accidental 
toppling over ricebags.’ 



PREM GRAND 
God lives in the Panch 

J UMMAN Sheikh, and Alagu Ghowdhari were fast 
friends. Beside tilling their fields in common, 
they carried on a joint money-lending business. So- 
strong indeed was their mutual faith in each other 
that when either of them was absent the other looked 
after his household. This happened when Jumman 
went on the Haj and Alagu had to go abroad on business.. 
What was the secret of this mutual trust and 
confidence ? Social or religious affinity ? No, but a 
common outlook and a community of ideas. And 
what better foundation could there be for a lasting 
friendship ? 

This friendship was not the outcome of any sudden 
impulse. It dated firom the days of their childhood, 
when Alagu sat for his lessons at the feet of Jumman’s 
father, who had his own notions how to bring up a 
lad. ‘Don’t spare the rod, or you’ll spoil him,’ 
is what he used to say. He practised this precept in 
the case of his own son Jumman, with the result that 
there was none in the village to equal him either in 
drafting a petition or drawing up a deed. In course- 
of time Jumman was highly esteemed in the village 
and the neighbourhood for his scholarship and attain- 
ments. Alagu’s father held different views. He- 
believed that your teacher’s blessing would transform 
you into a fine scholar, and there could be no surer- 
way to his good grace than to keep his hookah fresh 
and feed his chillum regularly. Poor Alagu was never 
found wanting in this service. And if in the end he 



64 


PREM GHAND 


failed to acquire much learning, the fault was not 
his but that of the stars. So argued his old father. 

That does not mean that Alagu was without in- 
fluence in the village. On the other hand, if Jumman 
was esteemed for his learning, Alagu was respected 
for his wealth. 

Now Jumman had an old relation, a maternal 
aunt, who had some property. This she transferred 
to him by a deed on the understanding that she would 
be well looked after. So long as the deed remained 
unregistered none was so obliging to the old lady 
as her nephew, none so considerate to her. Her 
every wish was anticipated and cheerfully carried out. 
But everything changed the moment the deed was 
registered. Jumman, who used to wait dotingly on 
his old aunt, now became supremely indifferent. His 
wife, Kariman, went even further. She grudged even 
the little food that the old lady ate. No meal was 
now served to her without Kariman letting loose a 
barb or two dipped in gall or poison. The very 
bread that the aunt ate seemed to be seasoned with 
the meat of abuse. And this went on mounting. 
Kariman would say : ‘How long is the old hag going 
to live ?’ ‘By giving us a few acres of waste land, 
she thinks she has bought us ‘She is a great lady 
who can’t swallow a morsel without her dal being 
seasoned with gheeV ‘We could have purchased a 
whole village with the money spent on her feeding.’ 

Patience has its limits. One day, unable to bear 
this constant nagging and insult from his wife, the 
aunt spoke to Jumman. Jumman flatly refused to 
interfere in household affairs. He told her in 
effect that his wife knew best how to run the house. 



65 


GOD LIVES IN THE PANCH 

Orestfallen, the old lady tried to bear as well she could 
her daily humiliation. But at length even her patience 
gave way. She called Jumman and said to him : ‘My 
son, it is clear there is no room for me in your house. 
You had better give me a small allowance so that I 
can set up a separate kitchen.’ 

‘Does money grow on trees ?’ replied Jumman 
tartly. 

‘Of course not. But how am I to live ?’ pleaded 
the aunt. 

‘Who said that you had conquered death ?’ taunted 
Jumman gravely. 

This exasperated the aunt. She threatened to 
take her case before the panchayat. Nothing coidd 
please Jumman better. He knew that the panchayat 
could give one decision and one only. Was there any- 
one in the village whom he had not obliged ? Was 
these one who dared to incur his displeasure ? Surely, 
the members of the panchayat would be his friends 
and not angels from heaven. So, when, the old 
lady threatened to take her case to the panchayat, 
Jumman laughed within himself as a hunter laughs 
when he sees his quarry walk unwarily into the very 
trap he has set for it. 

For days after this incident the old woman could be 
seen, leaning on her poor staff, going about from 
villager to villager to enlist their sympathy. With her 
body doubled up with age, weak and infirm, dragging 
her unwilling feet, she persisted in her naission. There 
was no one into whose ears she did not pour her 
pitiable tale. But not many were moved. Most 
of th-^m could offer her only verbal sympathy, which 
they never meant ; others cursed the hard times 



66 


PREM GRAND 


which had brought her to such a pass. Some even 
advised her to make it up with her nephew. ‘What 
more did she need,’ they said, ‘than a few morsels 
and to pziss her days in prayer ?’ Nor did the village 
lack men to whom the sight of the aged woman with 
her white hair and toothless mouth, and body bent 
as a bow, was a source of constant fun. The number 
of those who felt genuine pity for her was small 
indeed. 

At last after she had been to everybody else, the 
aunt came to Alagu. Panting from the exertion of 
the journey, she rested a little, and then explained the 
object of her mission. 

‘I have come to you, my son,’ she said, ‘to ask you 
to attend the Panchayat when the matter comes 
up.’ 

‘But is there any need for me to do this ?’ replied 
Alagu. ‘Surely, there will be many who will attend-it.’ 

‘Yes, I have been to every one of them,’ rejoined 
the aunt. ‘It is for them to do so or not.’ 

‘Since you insist, I will come,’ said Alagu ; ‘but 
you will have to excuse me if I don’t take any part 
in the proceedings.’ 

‘Why so, my son ?’ 

‘Because, as you know, Jumman is my old fiiend. 
I can ill afford to go against him.’ 

‘But is it right, my son, that for his sake you should 
keep your mouth shut and not say what you feel, 
what you consider just ?’ 

When our conscience is asleep we may not be con- 
scious of the wrong we do unwittingly, but challenge 
your conscience, wake it up, and you will find that it 
puts up with nothing that is unfair. So it happened 



GOD LIVES IN THE PANCH 67 

with Alagu. He did not reply, but the words of the 
old lady kept ringing in his ears. 

The panchayat was scheduled to be held in the 
evening under the village tree. Jumman saw to* 
all the arrangements. A carpet was spread, and ay 
good supply of pan, elaichi and hookahs was provided. 
As the guests began to arrive one by one, they were- 
welcomed by Jumman, who had taken his seat -witlu 
Alagu in a far comer. As the sun set, the proceedings 
of the panchayat started. Overhead on the tree 
another panchayat was going on : the birds werfe 
holding their evening meeting. 

As one looked round, one could see that the majo- 
rity of those who had come to the panchayat were 
those who were not well disposed towards Jummam 

The scene presented a strange sight. , Live char- 
coal was kept glo-wing in one comer to feed the 
chillums, and this was in constant demand by the 
guests. The village barber, who attended to this- 
business, had hardly a moment’s rest. In another 
corner the village children were shouting, crying,, 
and quarrelling ; and in yet another the village dogs^ 
thinking it was a feast day, had assembled in full’ 
force. In short, there was excitement and hubbub- 
all round. 

When all the panches had taken their seats, -the 
aged aunt rose, and thus addressed them : 

‘You know, members of the panchayat, that three 
years ago I executed a deed in favour of my nephew 
Jumman, transferring all my property to him. 
Jumman on his part promised to maintain me. For 
a long time I have been subjected to abuse, insults andi 
nagging from his -wife without any help from Jumman*. 

6 



68 


PREM CHAND 


Things have now come to such a pass that it is no 
longer possible for me to live with him. I am denied 
food and clothes. I am a helpless widow, too 
poor to nm to the courts for redress. All I can do 
is to appeal to you for justice. Please advise me 
what to do. Punish me if I am in the wrong, 
but if you find fault with Jumman correct him. I 
solemnly assure you that I shall faithfully carry out 
your orders.’ 

Ramadhan Misra, some of whose tenants Jumman 
had settled in his own village, and who consequently 
nursed a grievance against him, now rose and 
asked Jumman to suggest his nominee to act as 
head-panch, each party to the dispute having the 
right to do so. 

Jumman did not fail to understand the significance 
of this remark. He knew that the majority of those 
who had turned up were against him for one reason 
or another. He therefore replied : 

‘The voice of the panch is the voice of God. Let 
my aimt herself nominate the head-panch. I shall 
abide by her decision.’ 

And when the old woman shouted, ‘Why, man 
of God, why don’t you suggest yournominee?’ Jumman 
sharply retorted: 

‘I ]^ow it is your hour of triumph. Choose your 
own nominee. It’s all the same to me.’ 

The insinuation was not lost on the aunt. She 
rebuked him : 

‘My son, fear God. The panch knows neither 
friend nor enemy. If you don’t trust anyone, don’t 
propose any name. But what do you say to Alagu 
Chowdhari ?’ 



GOD LIVES IN THE PANGH 69 

Jumman was not prepared for this good luck. 
Hiding his secret joy, he replied : 

‘Very well. If you must have him, have him. 
It is all the same to me whether you nominate Alagu 
Ghowdhari or Ramadhan Misra.’ 

Alagu, who did not wish to be dragged into the 
dispute, now demurred, and said : 

‘Aunt, you are not unaware of my relations with 
Jumman.’ 

‘I know them well, my son,’ she replied, ‘but I 
also know that you will not kill your conscience for 
the sake of fnendship. Allah lives in the heart of 
the panch, and his voice is the voice of God.’ 

That is how Alagu Ghowdhari became the head- 
panch. Ramadhan Misra and others who were 
opposed to Jumman cursed the old woman for her 
folly in their heart of hearts. 

Alagu now began. Addressing Jumman he said : 

‘Sheikh Jumman, you and I are old friends. When- 
ever any ofi us was in trouble, the other came to his 
help. Now I am a panch. You and your aunt are 
equal in my eyes. If you have anything to say in your 
defence, say it.’ 

Jumman, believing that Alagu was only pretending 
to be fair and just, replied confidently ; 

‘Members of the panchayat, know that three years 
ago my aunt executed a deed in my favour, transferring 
all her property to me. In return I promised to 
maintain her as long as she lived. God is my witness 
that I have kept my word. I have obeyed her as I 
would have obeyed my mother. It is my duty to 
serve her, but I cannot disguise the fact that there 
have been occasional quarrels between her and my wife. 



70 PREM GRAND 

Women axe always like that. It is no fault of mine. 
My aunt now claims a monthly maintenance allowance 
from me. That is beyond me as her property does not 
yield as much. Beside, there is no mention of it in the 
deed. Had it been, I would have washed my hands 
clean of it. This is all that I have to say in the matter.’ 

Alagu Chowdhari was no novice. His business 
took him often to the courts. He knew law as well 
as any lawyer. He made mincemeat of Jumman in 
his cross-examination. Each question that he thundered 
out fell like the blow of a hammer. Ramadhan was in 
exultation, while Jumman was wondering, ‘What 
devil is in this friend of mine ! Only a moment ago 
he was talking to me so cordially. Now he seems 
to be bent on digging my grave. God knows what 
ancient grudge he is feeding fat today.’ 

While Jumman was still lost in these thoughts, Alagu 
pronounced the verdict : 

‘Jumman Sheikh ! The members of the panchayat 
have gone into the matter most carefully. / It is their 
considered opinion that you are liable to pay to your 
aunt a fixed monthly allowance out of the realization 
from her property. If you do not comply with 
this decision, the deed transferring her property to you 
will be deemed void.’ 

Jumman was stunnedi The words fell on his ears 
like a thunderbolt. He could not understand. The 
friend on whom he relied so much had suddenly 
turned into a bitter foe ! It was only in crucial moments 
like this that friendship was tested ! The Kaluga had 
indeed come, for deceit and treachery were synonymous 
with friendship. No wonder that plague and cholera 
ravaged the country! 



GOD LIVES IN THE PANCH 71 

It was different with Raraadhan Misra and other 
members of the panchayat. No praise was now too 
high for Alagu and his sense of fairness and justice. 
‘This is the true panchayat.’ ‘Alagu has divided truth 
from falsehood as a swan separates milk from water.’ 
‘Friendship has its place in life, but it cannot 
override truth and justice.’ ‘It is only honest men 
like Alagu who sustain the earth, or it would have 
sunk under the ocean long ago.’ These were some of 
the remarks they were making. 

As a result of the panchayat verdict, the strong 
roots of the tree of friendship which Jumman and 
Alagu had planted together were now sorely shaken. 
The two were seldom seen together. A single blast 
of truth had loosened their friendship. It fell Uke a 
tree whose roots, instead of going deep into the solid 
earth, were loosely held in sand. 

The two friends now became over-formal in ex- 
changing courtesies. They avoided meeting each 
other, and if they ever met by chance, it was like a 
sword meeting the shield. Day and night there was 
only one rankling thought in Jumman’s heart, how 
to revenge himself on Alagu for his dark treachery. 

It is always easier to harm a person than to do him a 
good turn. If you are constantly on the look-out for 
an opportunity to wrong someone, you axe sure to 
find it sooner or later. Jumman had not long to wait. 

Alagu had purchased a year ago from the Bateshwar 
fair a pair of fine bullocks. With their beautiful 
long curved 'horns and Western breed, they were 
for months the envy and the rage of the whole village. 
But as ill luck would have it, one of the bullocks died. 
As this happened soon after the panchayat, the 



72 


PREM CHAND 


relations between the two fidends became further 
strained. Jumman started saying, ‘God’s punishment 
has overtaken Alagu for his treacherous conduct.’ 
Alagu on his side began to connect the bullock’s sudden 
death with Jumman. He suspected that Jumman 
had poisoned it. His wife openly went about 
accusing Jumman of the crime. The two viragos now 
came out and hurled abuse and insults at each other. 
It was only with great difficulty that their husbands 
succeeded in parting them. Jumman dragged his wife 
away from the scene of battle, and Alagu had to 
wield his stick to quiet the other woman. 

With one bullock dead, Alagu had now no use for 
the other. . For long he tried hard to secure another 
bullock to make up his pair, but without success. He 
therefore decided to sell it. 

There lived in the village one Samjhu Sahu, a cart- 
driver, who carried on his business between the village 
and the town. He used to taJke the village commo- 
dities to the town, and with the proceeds of their sale 
he brought back to the village such goods as found a 
ready market there. He thought to himself that if 
he could get Alagu’s bullock he would be able to make 
at least three or four trips daily to the town and 
back, and thus swell his profits. At present all 
he could do was to make one or two trips to the town 
market. With this purpose he negotiated for the 
purchase of Alagu’s bullock ; and ultimately, after 
trial, purchased it on the understanding that he 
would pay the price in a month’s time. 

Hoping to multiply his income several times and 
finding the bullock strong and hefty, Samjhu Sahu 
began to overwork it. Three trips to the town were 



GOD LIVES IN THE PANGH 73 

now his daily routine, and sometimes even four. The 
bullock was hardly allowed to rest or to take its full 
feed. It had hardly finished one trip when it was yoked 
for another. How different firom its life at Alagu’s ! 
There it was used only occasionally. A servant 
looked after it constantly, and its body was rubbed 
hard twice a day. No wonder it grew fat and 
strong, and always looked fresh. But now, instead 
of rest and good care, it was one unceasing round 
of trips to and from the town. And on top came 
starvation. In a month the poor bullock was reduced 
to a skeleton. It could hardly drag the cart. When 
it failed to do so, or its speed slowed down, a shower 
of blows invariably descended on its aching limbs. 

One day, when the bullock was already dead tired 
from three trips, Sahu loaded the cart with twice 
the normal weight for its fourth trip of the day. Jaded 
and tired out, tie poor animal strained its utmost to 
move the cart but failed. It tried again. This time 
it succeeded, but could not proceed more than a few 
yards. Sahu as usual began to rain down his blows,, 
till between the severe punishment it received and the 
tired limbs that were overstrained, the bullock tottered 
and collapsed. But still Sahu would not stop. He 
went on belabouring the poor animal till death came 
as a welcome release. 

Sahu did not know what to do. He looked round for 
help, but none was forthcoming. Then he slowly 
disengaged the dead animal from the cart and decided 
to spend the night there, but not before he had given 
a last kick to the poor animal and cursed it for 
landing him in such difficulties. For the truth is that 
it was not the loss of the bullock which troubled 



74 


PREM CHAND 


Sahu so much as the dread fact that the cart carried 
a large quantity of ghee^ gur and salt, which in terms 
of money meant much ; and in addition he had on 
his person about two hundred and fifty rupees 
which he had realized firom the day’s sale of village 
goods. Sahu could not leave the cart with its rich 
foad, nor did he dare to trudge the distance home 
alone and unfriended with so much cash about him. He 
therefore thought it best to remain where he was, 
passing the long weary night awake with the help of 
his chillum. Tying his purse round his waist like 
a belt, he busied himself with his chillum and char- 
coal till midnight came. Then, wearied with the 
day’s work and his misfortune, his eyes began to 
droop, and he was soon fast asleep. 

Not till daybreak did he awake. Then, casually 
passing his hand round his waist to see that 
all was safe, he discovered to his horror that all 
the money was gone. He ran to his cart only to 
find that the tins of ghee, which he had care- 
fiilly stored there, were also gone. Overwhelmed 
with grief he flung himself on the ground, beat his 
head, and wept. When he had recovered a little from 
the shock he stood up, and managed somehow to 
trudge home. Long did the Sahuian beat her 
breast and bitterly did she cry when she heard the 
doleful story. She cursed and abused Alagu as the root 
cause of all their misfortunes. If he had not sold in 
an evil hour the ill-starred bullock, surely they would 
never have had to see that day ! They had lost all 
their life’s savings. 

One day, several months after the bullock’s death, 
Alagu thought to remind Sahu about the bullock’s 



GOD LIVES IN THE PANCH 75 

price. This was enough to make Sahu and his 
wife fly at him like mad dogs. ‘Look at the 
fellow’s brazenness !’ they cried. ‘He has the cheek 
to come to us and demand the bullock’s price after 
all the misfortune which the animal has brought 
on us !’ ‘He sold us a dead beast, and now he wants 
us to pay for it !’ ‘We are true Banias, who know 
what is - what. First go and wash your dirty 
face in ditch-water, and then come to us for payment.’ 
‘After all, we did not use your bullock for more than 
a month, and if you must insist on your claims, better 
take away our bullock. Use it for two months, if 
you please, and then return it to us. This is the utmost 
that we can do,’ shouted husband and wife. 

Alagu Ghowdhari was not without his enemies 
in the village. The news that Sahu had refused to 
honour his promise soon spread. All those whom 
Alagu had displeased now gathered round Sahu and 
supported his contention. But one hundred and 
fifty rupees — the price of the bullock — ^was not 
a small sum and Alagu could ill afford to forgo it. 
Though rebuffed and abused again and again by Sahu 
whenever he approached him, he did not give up his 
claim. 

One day, when Sahu’s ton^e was unusually 
sharp, Alagu too lost his temper. Sahu rushed to 
his cottage to fetch his lathi, when his wife took 
the field. Before Sahu could return, Sahuian, secure 
in her womanhood, flew at Alagu, who however 
hit back with such zeal that she found safety lay 
in a hasty retreat to her house. She ran as 
fast as her legs could carry her and bolted the 
doors of her room from inside. Meanwhile a large 



76 


PREM GRAND 


crowd had gathered and tried to pacify the comba- 
tants. On its advice both Sahu and Alagu agreed 
to refer the matter to the panchayat for decision. 

For a second time preparations for holding the 
panchayat were set afoot. Both parties started 
vigorous canvassing in their support. At length, on 
the third day after the quarrel, the panchayat met. 
The setting was the same as for the first panchayat. 
The panches sat under the same old tree. The 
evening was no different, and the birds again assembled 
on the branches to debate issues affecting their 
welfare. The crows were discussing their right to 
the green peas in the field ; and the parrots whether 
men were justified in charging them with inconstancy 
when they themselves were faithless to their friends. 

When the full panchayat had assembled, Ramadhan 
Misra proposed that nominations should be invited 
for the head-panch. Turning to Alagu, he inquired 
if he had any particular man in view. Alagu replied 
meekly, ‘No, let Sahu propose.’ Thereupon Sahu, 
glad to have his own man, shouted, ‘I nominate 
Sheikh Jumman.’ 

At the sound of Jumman’s name Alagu’s heart began 
to sink. His face turned pale, and he looked as if he 
had received a sudden blow. But what could he do ? 
He had himself asked Sahu to make his own nomination. 
Ramadhan Misra, his friend, sensed what was passing 
in Alagu’s mind, and in order, to help him out he 
slyly prompted : ‘Have you, Alagu, any objection 
to Sahu’s nomination ?’ But Alagu did not take 
the hint. In a low and despondent voice he replied, 
‘None whatever.’ 

So Jumman became the head-panch. 



GOD LIVES IN THE PANCH 77 

We become conscious of our weaJsnesses the moment 
we are placed in some responsible position. We 
then try to prove equal to the task. If we are ever 
tempted to go astray, it is this thought which prevents 
us from doing so. Does the editor ever care to weigh 
his words when he launches his fiery denunciations, 
day in and day out, against the Government ? But 
let him have a seat in the Cabinet. Now none is 
so thoughtful, so wise, so far-sighted as he. Or, take 
the case of a young man. How reckless and ir- 
responsible he is ! What sleepless nights does he not 
^ve his parents by his conduct ? But let him marry 
and have children. The same wild youth is now 
transformed into a sober and grave householder. 

So it happened with Sheikh Jumman. The moment 
he became head-panch he suddenly became con- 
scious of the gravity of his office. Seated in that high 
place, he knew he had to hold the balance even, 
to sift right from wrong, to utter nothing which might 
even remotely be construed as unfair. He must 
not allow his personal feelings to swerve him one 
hair’s breadth from the path of truth. 

Alagu and Sahu now stated their respective cases. 
After hearing the parties the panches came to the 
unanimous decision that Sahu should compensate 
Alagu. The only issue on which they difiered was 
whether Alagu was entitled to the full price of the 
bullock, or whether, taking into consideration the 
loss suffered by Sahu, there should be any reduction 
in the price. Two were for the former and two forthe 
latter view. The point was also pressed that Sahuhad 
been guilty of treating the bullock cruelly, and so 
causing its death. He should, therefore, not merely 



78 


PREM GHAND 


pay its price to Alagu, but in addition should be fined, 
so that in future no one would dare to ill-treat 
the cattle. After the issues had been discussed long 
and carefully, Jumman delivered the judgement. 
Addressing the parties he said : 

‘Alagu Ghowdhari and Samjhu Sahu ! The panches 
have heard you, and considered the issues carefully. 
It is their decision that Alagu is entitled to the full 
price of the bullock, for at the time when he sold it it 
suffered firom no disease or disability. If Samjhu 
had then paid the price, the issue now before the 
panchayat would never have arisen at all. The death 
of the bullock was caused by overwork and want of 
proper care. Alagu is in no wise to blame.’ 

Though satisfied that the decision was in favour of 
his firiend, Ramadhan Misra still urged that an example 
should be made of Samjhu for killing the bullock, 
and that he should be fined. Jumman countered by 
retorting that this was altogether a separate issue, and 
\yas not before the panchayat. When Samjhu pleaded 
for some consideration in view of his plight, Jumman 
answered it was entirely for Alagu to decide whether 
or not to reduce the price. 

Alagu could now no longer contain his feelings. 
He stood up and shouted over and over again, ‘Victory 
to the panchayat !’ The crowd took up the cry, 
and soon the whole village echoed with ‘Victory to the 
panchayat !’ 

Everyone was now loud in praise of Jumman. 
Some said, ‘This is what justice means.’ Others, 
^This is surely not man’s doing. God lives in the 
heart of the panches, and directs their thoughts. How 
then could the panches ever be deceived ?’ 



GOD LIVES IN THE PANGH 79 

Soon afterwards Jumman came up to Alagu and, 
embracing him, said : 

'Since the last panchayat I had been your sworn 
enemy. Today I realized what it was to be a 
panch ; that he has no private feelings of his own ; 
that he knows neither friend nor foe. All that matters 
to him is to administer justice. I am convinced 
now that the panch speaks with the voice of God.’ 

This was too much for' Alagu. He broke down 
and wept on Jumman’s shoulders. The tears which 
he shed that day washed away aU the dirt and dust of 
misunderstanding between the two friends, and thus 
the withered and faded creeper of their friendship 
once again became fresh and green. 

Translated from Panch Parmeshwar by the editor* 



TARASHANKAR BANERJEE 
Boatman Tarini 

•noATMAN Tarini always walked with his shoulders 
■^bent. Unusually tall, he had too often bumped his 
head against lintels and branches of trees and the 
bamboo ceilings of huts, and had learnt his lesson. 
But on the river, punting his palmbark ferry-boat 
with a very long pole, he would bear himself absolutely 
erect. 

It was the month of Asharh. Pilgrims were coming 
back after their holy dip in the Ganges on the occasion 
of the Amhubachi festival. It was a tired crowd, 
mostly old women, hurrying to their homes across 
the Mayurakshi. 

Tarini finished his smoke and shouted, T can’t 
take any more of you, mothers. You’re all so heavy 
with the load of your piety !’ 

‘Just one more, my good man,’ said an old woman, 
‘this little boy...’, while another called out, ‘Gome 
along, Sabi, come quick.... Be done with your 
laughing and jabbering, and don’t let’s see your 
devil’s-bone teeth any longer !’ 

Sabi or Sabitri, joking and laughing with a little 
crowd of girls firom neighbouring villages, called 
back : ‘You go ahead — ^we’re all going together the 
next trip.’ 

The boatman intervened, ‘No, my dears, you come 
this trip. If your crowd comes together, my boat’ll 
sink, I’m sure !’ 

‘If it must sink, Tarini,’ said the girl, ‘go down 
with the old ones. They’ve all bathed in the Ganges 



BOATMAN TARINI 


81 


ten or twelve times, you know ; and they wouldn’t 
mind dying for they’d go straight to heaven ! This 
was our first bath in the Ganges, you see !’ 

T see, mothers, you’ve brought the Ganges waves 
in your imagination,’ said the boatman and jumped 
on to the boat, and the crowd laughed. Kalachand, 
Tarini’s rpate, collected the fare from each person. 

‘Any more fares ?’ he shouted, and then pushed 
away from the shore. ‘God be praised I’called out 
Tarini as he pushed his pole against the river-bank. 

‘God be praised !’ The pilgrims took up the cry, 
the woods on both shores resounded with it, while 
the swift-flowing river went by unconcerned, laughing, 
as it were, a low, cruel laugh. 

‘Blast you, Kala, can’t you get a good grip on the 
rudder ?’ growled Tarini, ‘You don’t eat rice, it 
seems. Can’t you see the current, you fool ?’ 

Tarini was right. The Mayurakshi is famous for 
its vfery strong current. For seven or eight months 
in the year, the river is a desert-sands, sands stretching 
for a mil'e and a half. But when the rains came, she 
would be terrible, demoniac. She would race along, 
four to five miles wide, her deep grey water rushing 
torrentially, swamping everything within reach. 
There would come, on occasion, the harpa flood, 
when the water, six to seven cubits deep, rushes into 
the villages nearby and washes away homes and 
fields and^anaries and everything that stands in her 
way. But this does not happen very often. The 
last time was about twenty years ago. 

The sun was now oppressive, and a passenger 
opened his umbrella. ‘Don’t you put up your sail, 
Thakur, don’t you do such a thing,’ said Tarini. 



82 TARASHANKAR BANERJEE 

‘You will fly away !’ The man promptly shut the 
umbrella. 

Suddenly, there came a shriek from up river. 
Everyone in the boat looked up, in consternation. 
‘Be careful, all of you, but you’re all right,’ said Tarini, 
‘A boat’s sinking near Olkura landing stage. . . . Hi, 
old mother, why do you tremble so ? I say, Thakur, 
you look after her.... There’s nothing to fear. 
We’re almost there.’ 

‘Now then, Kala, hold this pole, and be sharp 
about it,’ said Tarini, then plunged into the water 
and swam towards the boat. Some of the old women 
began to wail : ‘What’ll happen to us, Tarini ?’ 

‘Shut up, you old hags,’ cursed Kala. ‘Don’t call 
out to him now, or you’ll die, you’ll die !’ 

In the grey water a little further on, one could 
see something white going down and popping up 
again. Tarini swam towards it, quickly, with easy 
strokes. When he came near, he had to plunge for 
it, and as he came up againj was seen pulling some- 
thing dark with one hand and swimming with the other. 

The crowd on the shore was watching Tarini, with 
fear and anxiety. In a moment they cried, ‘God be 
praised !’ And from the other shore came shouts, 
‘Is everything all right ? Is everything all right ?’ 

Kalachand was then going ahead with' his bark. 

Tarini was fortunate. The girl he had rescued 
belonged to a prosperous family of the loc^ty. Her 
boat was safe, but she had moved to sit near the edge ; 
her long veil had made her misjudge the movement, 
and she had toppled over. She had swallowed 
some water, but not overmuch, and was soon nursed 
back to consciousness. 



BOATMAN TARINI 


83 


She was quite a young girl — ^not much over 
sixteen — good-looking, wearing a number of 
ornaments, earrings and a nose-ring and bangles 
and a necklace. She was still gasping for breath 
when her husband and father-in-law arrived on 
the scene. 

Tarini -bowed deeply to both, and the girl quickly 
lowered her long veil. 

‘Don’t be so shy, mother,’ said Tarini, ‘but take 
a few deep breaths. They say that shyness brings 
a lot of trouble.’ 

‘Tell me, Tarini,’ said the father-in-law, ‘what 
woiold you like ?’ 

Tarini scratched his head for a while and then 
muttered, ‘Oh, give me the price of a pot of wine 
— eight annas.’ 

‘Don’t be such a fool,’ said Sabi from the crowd. 
‘Can’t you ask for something more valuable ?’ 

Tarini looked as if he had just taken in the situation, 
and smiled shyly, ‘Let me have a big nose-ring, Mr 
Ghosh.’ 

Sabi called out again, ‘O, I say, Tarini, how the 
wife must shake her nose when she talks !’ The good- 
humoured crowd laughed. 

The girl whom Tarini had rescued now put out 
her fair hand, and on the palm was a gold nose-ring, 
shining in the morning sun. 

‘Come over to our place, Tarini, during Dassara,’ 
said the girl’s father-in-law, ‘and you shall have a 
dhoti and chaddar. And here’s five rupees.’ 

Tarini bent low in a grateful bow and mumbled, 
‘If, sir, you could let me have a sari for the wife and 
not a dhoti for me. . . 

7 



'84 


TARASHANKAR BANERJEE 

‘All right, that’ll be all right,’ he laughed. ‘You 
■shall have it.’ 

‘You must let us see your wife, Tarini,’ said the 
irrepressible Sabi. ‘Oh ! She’s nothing to look at,’ 
said Tarini. ‘Nothing to look at, mother ! — She’s 
dark and ugly !’ 

When Tarini reached home that night, he was 
dead drunk. 

Feeling his way on the road, he was grousing 
to Kalachand, his companion, ‘Who’s dug these 
holes, Kala ? Holes, holes, holes — there’s one d — !’ 
Kalachand, equally drunk, could only mumble 
agreement. 

‘Let’s swim home,’ Tarini went on, ‘don’t you 
see, these holes will fill ■with water. . . . But, 
d — f there’s no water here — ^it’s all level. What- 
ever’s the matter, Kala ?’ There was no reply, and 
Tarini went ahead, flinging liis arms about as if he 
were swimming. 

Tarini’s hut was in an outlying part of the village. 
And there was Sukhi, his wife, waiting for him with 
a lamp at the door. 

The boatman was trying to sing about nose-rings, 
but Sukhi came up and Stopped him. ‘Now then,’ 
she said, ‘stop that noise and come and eat your rice — 
it’s cold and stiff as ice. . . so htirry !’ 

Tarini pushed her back and said, ‘Rice ! Rice ! 
Forget it now. You must put oti the nose-ring 
first. . . .Where did I put the bally thing ?’ He was 
searching with uncertain fingers in the folds of his 
dhod round the waist. 

‘One of these days you’ll go to rescue someone 
and be gone yourself,’ said Sukhi, who had already 



BOATMAN TARINI 85 

heard of his morning’s feat. ‘FU hang myself if you 
do, you know !’ 

*But why — ^what have I done ?’ said Tarini, a 
little bewildered. 

‘These days of flood. . . and you — ’ 

Tarini laughed, startling the fearful darkness 
of the rainy evening. ‘You can’t fear your mother, 
can you now ? And isn’t the Mayurakshi a mother 
to me ? I get what food I can because of her, don’t 
I ?’ 

Sukhi had not waited to listen, but was looking 
after his meal. 

‘Why don’t you listen ?’ said Tarini as he went 
towards the kitchen ; and catching Sukhi from behind, 
he shouted, ‘You must come with me now and see 
the river !’ 

‘Don’t be a fool and worry me,’ she said. And 
Tarini shouted, ‘You must come — ^yes, a hundred 
times, yes. We’ll go to the river and I’ll jump in, 
with' you on my back, and we shall come up again at 
Panchthupi ghat.’ 

‘Yes, yes, that’ll be all right,’ said Sukhi, to placate 
him. ‘But you must have your rice first.’ 

Tarini was going to flare up, but be had bumped 
his head against the door and sobered down. Eating 
his rice, he began : ‘Didn’t I. rescue a couple of cows 
that time — and that devil, Madan Gop, cheated me 
of fifteen rupees — ^fifteen rupees ! A hell of a lot of 
money that was — ^five short of a score, d — ! 
Who gave you those bangles ? Tell me — ^which, 
which of your uncles did ? If that scoundrel 
Madan drowns in the river. I’ll make him swallow 
something before I pull him out — d- will, by God I'' 



86 TARASHANKAR BANERJEE 

Sukhi meanwhile was unloosing his waistband, and 
found a nose-ring and three rupees. 

‘What have you done with the other two?’ she asked. 

‘Oh, I gave it to Kala,’ said Tarini, a little guilty. 
‘The fellow was there, you know, and I said, “Hi, 
take this”.’ 

Sukhi knew where he had been, but said nothing. 
She wasn’t much used to bandying words. Tarini 
began again ‘That time, you remember, you were 
ill and I wasn’t plying — the post was held up and the 
police officer couldn’t go across, and then I was called, 
and out of my tips I got you that earring, didn’t I 
now ?. . . The river’s been good to me, she has.’ 

‘Wait a moment,’ said Sukhi, ‘and let me put on 
this nose-ring.’ 

Tarini was pleased, and stopped jabbering. And 
as she was putting it on before her little mirror, he went 
on staring at her, forgetting his food, and when she 
had finished, he raised the lantern even before he had 
washed his hand, and said, ‘Let me have a look 
at you, Sukhi.’ 

Sukhi’s face was transfigured in simple happiness. 

Tarini had told a lie to Sabitri ; Sukhi was pretty 
and slender and not too dark, either. He was proud 
of her, and very, very happy. 

The boatman was right. It was, indeed, the 
Mayurakshi that gave him his living. Every year, 
on Dassara day, he would worship tihie river. This 
year, too, he was worshipping as usual. He had put 
on a new dhoti, and Sukhi a new sari, both the gifts 
of Ghose Mahashay. The rains had not started ; 
the sandy bed of the river was glistening in the brilliant 



BOATMAN TARINI 


87 


summer sun. ‘Worship her well, brother,’ said Kesto 
Das of Bhogpur village, ‘let’s have some good rain and 
floods, too — the farmers must live, mustn’t they ?’ 

The silt deposited by the river overflowing both 
banks produced golden crops. 

‘You’re quite right,’ smiled Tarini. ‘Do you know 
what people say ? They say I worship the river and 
ask for the floods ! They forget, the fools, that the 
river is our mother and brings wealth to our country — . 
Don’t let the goat run away, Kala !’ 

The goat, about to be sacrificed, obviously did not 
like the hot sand in the river-bed. 

After the puja was over, Tarini drank heavily with 
his mate, Kalachand. ‘This time,’ said Kala, ‘if 
anyone drowns. I’ll go and save him and get a reward — 
I will, you know ! ’ Tarini laughed outright. ‘What an 
idea ! Kala to rescue people in the water — Ha ! ha !’ 

‘What did you say, you devil ?’ shouted Kala in 
injvured rage. Tarini, too, was ready to have a go 
at him, but Sukhi intervened : ‘Look, when the 
floods come, if anyone’s drowning this side of that 
pakur tree over there, you’ll save him, and if beyond 
that line, you will.’ In a spasm of drunken gratitude, 
Kalachand burst into tears and took the dust of Sukhi’s 
feet. ‘You’re good, sister, there’s none like you.’ 

The next morning the two of them set about repair- 
ing the boat. They worked till dusk and made it 
look like a new one. 

But the fierce sun soon made it crack. Through 
Asharh, the floods did not come. It did not even 
rain heavily enough to do more than wet the sand on 
the river-bed. Disaster was in the air ; one could 



88 TARASHANKAR BANERJEE 

hear, as it were, a low, plaintive cry from the land. 
Or perhaps disaster had come already somewhere near 
and was sending forth its premonition. Tarini could 
hardly earn enough to live. He would get a few 
coppers when some minor official would have him 
carry his bicycles across the sands, but that would 
hardly pay for his drinks. Officials, however, began 
suddenly to come pretty often — to inquire if there was 
any distress ! They would leave behind them nothing 
but, perhaps, a few shrivelled cigarette-ends. 

But the rains came next month, in Sravan. Tarini 
breathed happily again, and jumped into the water 
from the high river bank and swam with boyish exhila- 
ration. 

After three days, however, the water was only knee- 
deep. Tarini and Kalachand were waiting with 
their boat tied to a tree in the hope that some gentle- 
man might want to go across and they would just 
push the boat along for him. 

It was nearly evening, and no one had come. 
‘It’s queer, Kala, isn’t it ?’ said Tarini. ‘Yes,’ agreed 
Kala in a bewildered voice. ‘I have never seen such 
a thing in all my life.’ 

‘Look at the western sky,’ said Tarini. ‘It’s just blue 
— not a cloud anywhere and not a sound in the sky.’ 

‘Yes,’ said Kala. 

Tarini got suddenly furious and slapped his mate, 
‘Yes 1 Yes ! Yes ! How I love you to say yes ! Yes ! 
Yes !’ 

Kala only looked at Tarini in a foolish and 
embarrassed way. He wasn’t even resentful. Tarini 
felt he couldn’t stand it much longer and, looking 
away, went on sitting inert. 



BOATMAN TARINI 


89 


After a while, he turned round suddenly : ‘The 
wind has changed, Kala — ^it’s from the west. 
Let me see — He poured a handful of sand 
down very slowly to find out if it wzis the west wind. 
‘Hum... it’s from the west — -just. Gome on, Kala, 
let’s go and have a drink. I’ve got two annas 
today — Sukhi had it tied in a comer of her sari and 
I pinched it.’ 

Kalachand came back to life, happy at this cordial 
invitation. He followed Tarini and said, ‘Your 
wife has some dough, Dada. You’ll have your rice 
all right when you go home. . . . We’re done for.’ 

‘Sukhi’s a good girl, Kala, a very good girl,’ said 
Tarini. ‘I don’t know what I would do without her. 
That time when my brother was getting married ’ 

‘One moment, Dada’ Kala interrapted. ‘I’ll pick 
up that tal over there.’ He ran into the field near 
by. 

A small crowd was squatting under a tree. ‘Where 
do you people come from and where are you going ?’ 
asked Tarini. 

One of them answered, ‘We are from Birchandpur, 
brother. We’re going to Burdwan — ^there’ll be work 
for us there, we hope.’ 

‘Has it rained well in Burdwan ?’ 

‘No, there hasn’t been much rain, but there’s a 
canal, you know.’ 

Soon disaster had come to the country. Famine 
had lain concealed under the earth, and now that 
the ground was cracking under the fierce sun, it was 
showing its gruesome face. The farmer who had 
some stock shut his door to all comers, and the poor 



90 TARASHANKAR BANERJEE 

peasants starved. People were flocking out of their 
homes. 

That morning Tarini went to the river and found 
Kalachand absent. The day grew hotter, but Kala- 
chand did not come. Tarini went to his hut and 
shouted his name, but there was no reply. He entered 
the hut and found not a soul there. It was the same 
with the n^t hut, too. The whole neighbourhood, it 
seemed, had left. He made inquiries and found that 
everybody in Kala’s neighbourhood had left the 
night before. 

‘You know, Tarini, I told him again and again 
not to go,’ said Haru Mondol. ‘He just didn’t listen; 
said he’d go to a rich village and beg !’ Tarini was 
feeling too many lumps in his throat to speak. 

‘Are there any rich men in the country ?’ went 
on Haru. ‘They’re all gone. And some of them are 
in a pretty bad way — they’ll starve, but they must 
keep quiet about it. That village — ^let me see, yes — 
Palashdanga — ^there a gentleman put a rope round his 
neck the other day. He had nothing to eat, poor 
fellow !’ 

A revolting sight met Tarini’s eyes the next day. 
The corpse of an old woman was lying there ; jackals 
and dogs had tom off her limbs in the night. Tarini 
could recognize her ; she was a paralytic, and perhaps 
the night before her family — ^they were cobblers — ^had 
left her there, in a hurry to leave the stricken village. 

He did not linger, but went straight home and 
said to his wife, ‘Gome along, Sukhi, tie a few saris 
and some ornaments round your waist, and then 
we’ll go We may find work in the town.’ 

When they were going, Tarini noticed that Sukhi 



BOATMAN TARINI 


91 


had no ornaments. Surprised, he asked her what 
had happened to them. Sukhi smiled drily. ‘How 
do you think I ran the house aU this time ?’ 

They had trudged for three days and had taken 
shelter for the night on the outskirts of a village. 
Two ripe tals which had dropped from a nearby 
tree were their dinner. ‘Let me have your towel 
for a moment,’ said Tarini, and hung it on a bough 
and watched it closely. At dawn, Sukhi found him 
sitting in the same posture. 

‘Didn’t you sleep well ?’ she reproached him. 

‘I’ll be in a pretty mess if you’re ill Why does 

a man like you leave his home, I ask you ?’ 

Tarini ignored her, and after a minute, cried out 
to her : ‘Have you seen it, Sukhi, have you seen it ?’ 

‘What on earth have I seen ? I don’t understand 
your ways, I don’t.’ 

‘Look,’ said Tarini, ‘the ants were going up the 
trees with their eggs in their mouths. It’s going to 
rain, I’m sure it will.’ , 

‘You have some pretty ideas in your head,’ said 
Sukhi. 

‘But don’t you know, Sukhi, they have a premoni- 
tion ; they always go up the trees when the rains axe 
coming. . .And look, the breeze now is coming right 
from the west.’ 

‘But the sky is just dry and shining. . .you have 
some ideas, I tell you.’ 

Tarini was looking the other way. ‘It doesn’t 
take long for the clouds to come over. . . .And look, 
the crows are picking up dried-up twigs to fortify 
their nests ! . . .Let’s stay here, Sukhi, and see if it 
rains.’ 



9'Z TARASHANKAR BANERJEE 

The boatman’s practised observation had not been 
wrong. Towards the evening, the sky was overcast 
with clouds ; the west wind blew sharper and sharper. 

‘Get up, Sukhi, we’ll go back now,’ said Tarini. 

‘At this time of the day ?’ 

‘You aren’t afraid of the dark, dear ? Am I not 
with you ? Gome along now — there’s a good girl — 
and put that mathali on your head. To get wet is 
dangerous.’ 

‘What about yourself ?’ asked Sukhi. ‘I suppose 
your body’s made of stone !’ 

‘Yes,’' laughed Tarini, ‘the rain’s my friend, you 
know. I just get dried up in the sun and revel in 
the rain ! Come along then, and give me that load.’ 

It would rain very hard for some time and then 
the cheerless wind would drop and the rain would 
cease. But soon after the wind would rise, and rain 
would come down in torrents. 

They reached home in two days — ^it had taken 
them three days on the way out. It was evening, 
and Tarini ran to see what the river was like, and 
returned to report happily to Sukhi that the water 
was nearly overflowing the banks. 

Next morning, Tarini got ready for the river. The 
sky was heavy and dark, it was raining in torrents, 
and the wind was high. He returned at midday 
and said to Sukhi, ‘I must go at once to the smith’s.’ 

‘You must have something to eat before you go,’ 
said Sukhi, anxiously. 

‘No,’ replied Tarini, ‘the boat needs a new peg. 
The river is rising, or I might somehow have managed. 
Gome and see the river,’ he said, and dragged 



BOATMAN TARINI 


93 


Sukhi to the bank. The tumultuous beauty of the 
Mayurakshi was fascinating. You could hardly see 
the other bank ; the water was like scarlet, and white 
foam on the waves looked like fast-moving flowers. 
‘You hear her roar, Sukhi, don’t you ?’ said Tarini, 
‘but it’ll grow worse, I fear. You go home quick j 
I must somehow take the post across tomorrow.’ 

‘But how can you ?’ Sukhi complained. ‘This 
weather — ’ Tarini would not listen and moved 
away. 

He returned after dusk — ^in a hurry and rather 
worried. ‘Doog ! Doog ! Doog !’ What was that ? 

. . .Oh, he knew what it meant — ^impending danger. 
The floods were coming, not the kind that were good 
for his trade. 

To get home, he had to pass a bamboo bridge over 
a usually harmless tributary of the Mayurakshi that 
skirted his village. Tarini could walk back home 
blindfolded, but this time he could not find the 
bridge. Where it should have been, there was only, 
water, and soon he had to pull his dhoti up to prevent 
it getting wet. He could hear a disquieting roar — 
the swish of the wind and the sound of very rapidly 
advancing water. Soon, worms attacked his body — 
even they were scurrying away from their under- 
ground cells in a vain search for safety ! 

Tarini jumped into the water and swam into his 
village. But the floods had reached there before 
him. It was waist-deep water everywhere ; some 
of the villagers, holding precariously to an elevation, 
were shouting piteously to one another for help. 
How the cows and goats and sheep and dogs can 
moan in distress too ! And one could hear above 



•94 TARASHANKAR BANERJEE 

everything the roar of the Mayurakshi, the noise of 
the downpour and the cruel laughter of the winds .... 
It was as if plundering bandits were laughing 
and shouting down the cries of their terrified 
•victims. 

One could not find one’s way very easily in the 
dark. Tarini’s feet once touched something which 
felt like an animal. He bent down and picked it 
up — a small lamb, dead. He threw it away, reached 
his hut somehow and shouted for all he was worth, 
‘Sukhi ! Are you there ? Sukhi !’ 

‘Thank all the gods in heaven,’ he thought, when 
he heard Sukhi’s answer, T’m here.... Gome and 
see !’ 

In the small courtyard, the water was waist-deep. 
On the plinth, it was about knee-deep and there 
Sukhi was standing, •with fear in her eyes, holding 
on to a bamboo overhead. 

‘Come right out of here !’ Tarini dragged her away. 
‘How can you stay here ? The whole thing will 
collapse soon.’ 

‘I was waiting for you,’ said Sukhi. ‘Where else 
could you have looked for me ?’ 

Soon they were on the road in waist-deep water. 
‘What can we do, Sukhi?’ said Tarini, in a shaky voice. 

‘Don’t worry too much. . . . Everyone’s in the 
same plight.’ 

‘If the flood rises still — ^You can hear the roar ?’ 

‘It can’t, my life,’ said Sukhi, ■with a woman’s 
strange insouciance. ‘What’ll happen to the country 
then ? God can’t destroy His ovm creation, can He 
now ?’ 

Suddenly, there was a heavy splash on the water. 



BOATMAN TARINI 


95 


‘That’s our home — gone,’ said Tarini, in a broken 
voice. ‘Let’s get away — ^it’s nearly breast-deep for you 
here !’ 

‘Help ! Help 1’ someone was shouting. ‘My baby’s- 
gone ! My baby ! My baby 1’ 

‘I’ll go and see,’ said Tarini, reckless even in 
desperation. ‘You stay here, darling, and mind 
you answer me when I call.’ 

Tarini plunged into the darkness. ‘Whereabouts 
is the baby ?’ 

‘Hi ! This way ! . . .This way !’ 

‘I’m coming.’ 

An interchange of vocal gestures — ^for words could 
hardly be distinguished — ^went on for a while and 
then all was quiet. Almost immediately after, Tarini 
called, ‘Sukhi ! Sukhi !’ 

‘Here I am !’ she replied. Tarini came towards- 
her voice, and when he could see her, said, ‘It looks 
bad, Sukhi . . .hold on to my waist.’ 

Sukhi said nothing. She caught hold of Tarini’s 
dholi round the waist, and after a while said, ‘Whose 
child was it ? Gould you save him ?’ 

‘Yes, it was Bhupte Bhalla’s boy.’ 

They were wading carefully through the water. 
It was getting more and more difiBcrdt. ‘Get on 
to my back, Sukhi,’ said Tarini, ‘but — ^where are 
we ? Where ?’ 

Before he could finish, they both found themselves 
in very deep waters. ‘I’m afiraid it’s the river, Sukhi,’ 
said Tarini, when he floated up, ‘just hold on to my 
dhoti and try to float.’ 

They were moving fast in the current. It was 
pitch dark, the wind was whistling in their ears — 



96 


TARASHANKAR BANERJEE 

a swishing noise mingling uncannily with the roar 
of the river in flood. The rain was pelting, 
arrow-sharp, against their faces. They were float- 
ing like straws — ^for how long, they did not know. 
Their limbs were becoming stiff ; the cruel waves 
would sometimes almost suffocate them. And Sukhi’s 
clasp felt funny, thought Tarini anxiously. Was she 
getting heavier too ?. . .‘Sukhi ! Sukhi !’ he 
cried. 

‘Tan,’ came the dazed reply. 

‘Don’t fear, my love, I’m here — ’ 

But the next moment Tarini knew they were 
drowning, going round and round in a whirl. He 
never would be beaten, he thought, not by the river 
he loved, but Sukhi — ^with all his strength, he managed 
to reach the surface with her, but he knew there 
was danger ahead again — the whirlpool was no 
easy matter. He tried to get away from it — but 
Sukhi had clasped him tight with her arms. ‘Sukhi ! 
Sukhi !’ he cried, but there was no reply. 

They were going round and round again. They 
were drowning, no mistake about it. Tarini felt 
his limbs stiffening in Sukhi’s desperate embrace. 
Was she alive ? He himself was gasping for breath — 
he could not bear it. In a moment his hands 
were round Sukhi’s throat. . .he was mad. ..all 
his strength had flowed to his hands. If only he 
could get the load off him, he would live — ^Ah ! 
Ah ! He took deep breaths. He was absurdly 
relieved. He wanted light and the touch of the land. 
He wasn’t dead. 


Translated from che Bengali. 



RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 
Prabha 
I 

TT WAS spring-time. Everywhere mango-blossoms 
■^breathed their perfume on the air. The trees had 
shed their old leaves and clothed themselves afresh. 
Today was the ninth day of the moon of the month 
of Chaitra The people of Saket, men and women, 
were gathered on the bank of the River Sarayu, ready 
to go swimming. Bathing in the river was their 
way of celebrating the spring festival. Young men 
and women took part equally, bathing naked from 
the same landing-steps. Among the' girls were 
numerous Greeks, with skins white as snow ; their 
lovely bodies were as perfect as the marble statues of 
the Greek sculptors, and they had wonderful golden 
or auburn tresses. There were just as many Brahmin 
maidens, ■with ebony or yellow hair and golden eyes, 
not inferior to any of the Greeks in beauty. Nor 
was there less charm in the transient, youthfiil bloom 
of the dark-haired, wheat-coloured girls of Vaishyas. 

On this day all the virgin beauty of Saket, from 
every corner of the city, was gathered on the bank. 
Young men of the same diverse stocks were throwing 
off their clothes and preparing to dive into the river ; 
men with bodies hardened by exercise, well-rounded 
and handsome, of every shade of colour from pure 
white to wheat-yellow. Their hair, faces and noses 
bore the distinguishing marks, of their origin. No 
better opportunity than this bathing-festival could 
be afforded for scrutinizing the person of any youth 



98 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

or maiden. It was an opportunity that decided 
a marriage choice every year. Parents encouraged 
their children to make use of it in this way, which was 
quite proper to the occasion. 

The competitors went across the river in boats, 
and then dived in to swim back. Tresses of golden, 
auburn, pale yellow or reddish hair gleamed on the 
blue water, while blue-black tresses lost themselves 
in its colour, as the swimmers forced themselves 
across the current with threshing arms. A flotilla 
of small boats kept pace with them, the people in 
them urging on the swimmers or pulling out of the 
water those who became exhausted — ^for some mishaps 
were possible among thousands of competitors. 
Every swimmer was putting out all his strength in 
the effort to forge ahead. 

By the time two-thirds of the river’s breadth had 
been crossed, a great many of those in the race were 
exhausted. Just then two swimmers were seen pressing 
forward, ahead of the others. The point reached 
by them was marked by two floating masses of hair ; 
one yellow, the other auburn. As the bank drew 
close their exertions became still more violent, while 
the onlookers in the boats held their breath with 
excitement ; the two heads, far ahead of all rivals, 
were exactly abreast of each other. The goal was 
now very near. Everyone was hoping to see one 
of the two take the lead, but neither seemed able to 
shake the other off. It even appeared that someone 
in the boats heard them encouraging each other to 
win. 

They reached the bank simultaneously. One was 
a young man, the other a girl. The crowd applauded 



PRAJBHA 99 

them while they put on their clothes, and then they 
were carried off in open palanquins under a rain of 
flowers from the onlookers They were now able to 
take a closer view of each other. Not only their 
good swimming, but their good looks as well, were 
the object of the bystanders’ admiration. 

‘I know the maiden,’ one of these remarked ; 
‘but who is the young man, sir ?’ 

‘Have you never heard of Ashvaghosh, the son of 
Suvarnakshi ?’ 

‘No, I only know the Brahmins related to my own 
family priest. We merchants have no Id'sure for 
hearing things.’ 

‘Oh, but Ashvaghosh’s reputation for learning has 
spread far beyond Saket,’ exclaimed a third. ‘He 
is an expert master of all the Vedas and all learned 
subjects.’ 

‘But he can’t be more than twenty-four years old,* 
observed the first speaker. 

‘Yes, he is just twenty-four, and people read his 
songs and sing them in rapture.’ 

‘So this is the poet Ashvaghosh, whose love-songs 
are on the lips of all our young people !’ 

‘The same man. And what is the girl’s name, friend?* 

‘Prabha ; her father belongs to a distinguished 
family in our Greek commUruty here, and he is a 
merchant well known all over Kosal — ^Duttmitra.’ 

‘Oh, that explains it — ^we seldom see such beauty 
in any other community. How soft her body is to 
look at ! And yet what a strong swimmer !’ - 

‘Her parents are both unusually healthy and strong.* 

The crowds which thronged the city park to pay 
their warm tribute to the two swimmers learned all 

8 



100 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

about them ; and the bashful pair were making 
each other’s acquaintance. 

n 

The flower-gardens of Saket were a memorial of 
the reign of the General Pushyamitra. The latter 
had expended much money and labour in laying 
them out ; and though his dynasty ruled no longer, 
and Saket was not now the capital of any other royal 
family, the townspeople regarded them as a valuable 
possession of Saket, and sdll maintained them in as 
good order as in the days when Pushyamitra was on 
the throne. In the centre of the park was a hand- 
some lake, on whose clear blue water floated 
lotus-plants of many species, in full bloom, and a pair 
of swans. It was terraced all round with steps of 
white stone leading down into the water, and gleaming 
like crystal. A wide grass border stretched round the 
margin of the pool. Scattered beds were bright 
with roses, jasmine and many other flowers ; else- 
where stretched rows of ashoka plants and other 
shrubs. There were arbours, big and small, overhung 
with trailing creepers and floored with stone ; there 
were fields where boys and girls played at ball ; there 
were little ornamental hills of rock or earth, covered 
with green foliage ; there were fountains whose 
falling spray seemed to mimic showers of rain. 

In the afternoons a throng of young people of 
Saket was often to be seen about one of the arbours ; 
they were people who could not find room inside it. 
Today there was a crowd of this sort, but it stood all 
round in silence. All seemed to be listening intently 
to something from the arbour. Inside, on the stone- 



PRABHA 101 

flagged floor, sat the same youth who, a month before, 
had purposely failed to win the swimming race. 
He wore a tunic of smooth, soft silk ; his long fair 
hair was gathered up on top of his head. He held a 
stringed instrument, the resonant veena^ from which 
the effortless play of his fingers drew forth a bewitching 
melody He was singing to his instrument, with 
eyes half closed, lost in his music ; not another poet’s 
song, but his own. He had just finished his Sanskrit 
poem, Spring Cuckoo, and after Sanskrit he must sing 
something in .Prakrit, for the poet-musician knew 
that Prakrit was the better-loved language of his 
audience. He was singing his recent composition, 
Urvashi Viyog (‘Separation from Urvashi’) : the 
dancing-girl of heaven has been stolen away, and 
Pururva, who calls her his Apsara or water-nymph, 
is searching for her, calling her name, among hills, 
streams, lakes, woods, thickets, everywhere ; he cannot 
find her, but he hears her words echoing in the wind. 
The singer’s own eyes filled with tears as he sang of 
the tears of Pururva, and all his hearers wept with 
him. 

At the conclusion of the music, the crowd broke 
up and dispersed. When Ashvaghosh emerged, a 
group of young folk, who had lingered, surrounded 
him. Among them, with flushed and swollen eyes, 
stood Prabha. 

‘What a great poet you are !’ cried a youth, coming 
up to him. 

‘A great poet ? I am not even a poet, sir.’ 

‘Let me say what I think ! Listen ; we Greeks, 
here in Saket have a small theatre.’ 

‘For dances ? I am very fond of dancing, too.’ 



102 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

‘Not only for that ; we often have some acting there 
as welL’ 

‘Acting ?’ 

‘Yes ; it has a very honoured place among Greek 
customs We have painted scenery to call up different 
ages and countries, and we try to represent all the 
episodes in a realistic manner.’ 

‘I am very sorry to think that though I was born 
in Saket, I have never seen any of this acting.’ 

‘Our audience is confined to the Greek famihes 
of Saket and a few of their close friends ; so that there 
are many people in Saket to whom Greek acting. . 

‘Acting — that is, performing plays ?’ 

‘Yes, plays. Well, we are going to perform one 
today, and we should like you to see it.’ 

‘Very gladly ! It is very kind of you and your 
fiiends to invite me.’ 

Ashvaghosh went away with them, and a place 
was given him in the theatre, near the stage. The 
performance was of a Greek tragic drama, translated 
into Prakrit. All the roles were taken by young men 
and women of Greek descent, and all the actors and 
actresses wore Greek costumes. The various scenes 
had likewise been painted in the Greek * style. The 
heroine was Ashvaghosh’s acquaintance, Prabha, 
and her brilliant acting carried him away. During 
an interval, the Greek youth who had previously 
accosted Ashvaghosh, seized the opportunity of begging 
him to sing again Urvashi Viyog. He picked up his 
vema without hesitation, and went up to the stage. 
Once more his music drew forth his own tears and 
those of his hearers. Once, as he sang, his glance 
jnet the grieved eyes of Prabha. 



PRABHA 103 

When the play was over, all those who had taken 
part in it were introduced to the poet, in their dressing- 
room. 

‘In spite of living in Saket,’ he said, ‘I have been 
quite ignorant of this beautiful art. I am very grateful 
to you for giving me a view of a bright world I have 
never known.’ 

At the word ‘bright’, some of the girls looked at 
Prabha with a smile, for it was the meaning of her 
name. 

‘An idea has come to me,’ Ashvaighosh went on. 
‘Just as you have performed today a Greek play in a 
Prakrit translation, it seems to me that we might 
treat our own country’s legends in the same form, and 
put together some good plays ourselves.’ 

‘We are quite confident tibat if a poet like you were 
to take it up, he could compose dramas even better 
than these G^reek originals.’ 

‘That is too much to expect ! T am only fit to be 
an apprentice to your Greek playwrights. Well, 
shall I write a play on the story of Urvashi ?’ 

‘We shall be very glad to perform it ! But you will 
have to take the part of Pururva.’ 

*I have no objection, and I think with a little prac- 
tice I shall not do it too badly.’ 

‘We must get some scenery ready as well.’ 

‘For the scenery we must have views of Pururva’s 
country. I can paint a little myself, and I shall be 
able to lend some help with it if I am needed.’ 

‘It will be very good if we have the scenes painted 
under your direction. And you will have to give us 
instructions about the actors’ costumes and ornaments. 
What other parts will there be ?’ 



104 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

‘We can’t decide all the characters on the spot, 
friend. But we should keep the number small. How 
many should we have ?’ 

‘We can easily fill up sixteen parts, or say twenty.’ 

‘I shall try to limit the number to sixteen.’ 

‘Well then, you yourself are to be Pururva, and as 
for Urvashi how would our Prabha here do ? You 
have seen her acting today.’ 

‘To my inexperienced eyes she seemed quite perfect.’ 

‘Very good : we decide on her for Urvashi. In 
our club nobody can refuse to take on any work he is 
given.’ 

A slight frown crept into Prabha’s eyes, but when 
the handsome youth turned to her, saying, ‘Well, 
Prabha ?’ she gave a hesitant assent. 

m 

Ashvaghosh read through some Prakrit translations 
of Greek plays with the handsome young Greek, whose 
name was Buddhapriya, and discussed with him ideas 
about the scenery and so on. He borrowed Greek 
terms to describe stage-settings, to commemorate the 
art of Hellas. He wrote a play in a mixture of 
Sanskrit and Prakrit, prose and verse. In that period 
the Prakrit vernacular was still so close to the literary 
Sanskrit that the play was understood quite easily 
in families familiar with either language. This 
Urvashi Viyog was the first Indian drama, and Ashva- 
ghosh the first Indian playwright. Though it was 
his first attempt, Urvashi Viyog was not less beautiful 
than his later plays, such as Rashtrapal (‘Protector of 
the Nation’), or Sariputra (‘Son of Sari’). 

While the scenery was being got ready and the 



PRABHA 


105 


performance rehearsed, the young poet forgot every- 
thiug else, even food and drink. He felt that he was 
living through the most wonderful hours of his life. 
He and Prabha worked together for hours every day. 
Now the seeds of love sown in their hearts on the day of 
the race began to sprout. The young Greeks were 
anxious to see Ashvaghosh linked to them as a kinsman, 
and therefore felt that they had an interest in 
encouraging the connexion. 

One day after hours of labour with the brush, 
Ashvaghosh came out of the theatre and sat down on 
a chair in the small garden adjoining it. A moment 
later Prabha also came out. 

‘What had you in your mind,’ she asked in her 
natural pleasant tones, ‘while you were composing 
your Urvashi Viyog V 

‘The tale of Urvashi and Pururva.’ 

‘Of course, the story I know. You turned Urvashi 
into a water-nymph eind kept calling her a nymph, 
didn’t you ?’ 

‘Urvashi was a water-nymph.’ 

‘Then in the poem you described Pururva, separated 
from Uivashi, seeking her distractedly through streams 
and pools, hills and woods, and so on.’ 

‘It was natural for Pururva to behave like that in 
his situation.’ 

‘And then the singer of Urvashi Viyog let his own 
tears falling in the arbour make anoAer accompani- 
ment to his song, as well as the veena.^ 

*A singer or an actor must be absorbed in his 
theme, prabha.’ 

‘No ! You don’t want to tell me the truth.’ 

‘What are you thinking ?’ 



RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 


106 

‘I think that it was not the song of separation of 
any ancient Uwashi that you were singing.’ 

'What, then ?’ 

‘Your real water-nymph was a swimmer in the 
river Sarayu.’ 

‘WeU ?’ 

‘This nymph’s real Pururva was not wandering in 
search of her through any Himalayan hills or forests 
or streams or lakes or thickets, but near the Sarayu, 
the flower-garden pool, the artificial hills and pleasure- 
groves and creepers of Saket.’ 

‘Well ?’ 

‘His tears were not flowing in sympathy with any 
ancient Pururva* but to quench the fire that was 
burning his own heart.’ 

‘Prabha, let me tell you something else.’ 

‘Tell me ! All this time I have been talking too 
much.’ 

‘That day, when I came out of the arbour, I 
saw that your sweet blue eyes were swollen and 
inflamed.’ 

‘You had been making me cry with your music.’ 

‘That music spoke to you of your own separation 
from a lover.’ 

‘But the Urvashi in your poem had a heart of stone ; 
at least that is how you had portrayed her.’ 

‘Because I was troubled and helpless.’ 

‘Why ? What were you thinking ?’ 

‘That she had shone only for a moment, like light- 
ning, and I should never be able to enjoy the sight of 
her again ; that she must have forgotten me long 
since.’ 

‘Were you so insignificant — you, a poet ?’ 



PRABHA 107 

‘When a man has nothing to give him self- 
confidence, he can only think of himself as a kind 
of pauper.’ 

‘You are the great poet not only of Saket but of 
all our wide land. You are the winner of the Saket 
swimming race. Everyone in Saket is loud in praise 
of your learning ; and as for the women, the most 
beautiful girls of Saket are ready to make you the 
light of their eyes.’ 

‘What use is that ? For me, my Urvashi alone 
mattered. When I went for two weeks without seeing 
her, life seemed hollow. I am telling the truth, 
Prabha. I never found my mind so weak as then. 
If I had not seen you for another week, I don’t know 
what I should have done.’ 

'My poet, you should not be so selfish. You are 
our country’s immortal singer What great hopes 
she has of you ! Do you know how highly your Urvashi 
Viyog is being praised’ ? 

‘I have heard nothing.’ 

‘Last week a relation of mine, a Greek merchant, 
came here from Bharukachchha. There is a big 
Greek settlement there. In Saket we Greeks have 
turned into Indians, but over there they have 
not forgotten their old language. Many traders and 
scholars come to Bharukachchha from Greece. This 
relation of mine is very well-read in Greek literature. 
He compared your play with the compositions 
of the great Greek dramatist Euripides, and made a 
copy of it to take away with him. He said he would 
translate it into Greek and ‘send it to 'King Ptolemy 
of Egypt, who is a great lover of the theatre. There 
are always ships sailing between Bharukachchha and 



108 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

Egypt. While I listened to him talking, my heart 
was bursting with pride.’ 

‘It means everything to me to know that your heart 
is proud of me, Prabha.’ 

‘You don’t know your own worth.’ 

‘I know it now, Prabha. You have been its touch- 
stone.’ 

‘No, you must not feel like that. Ashvaghosh the 
lover of Prabha, and Ashvaghosh the great poet of the 
age, are two individuals ; you must keep them apart. 
The lover may say and do what he likes, but the 
great poet is more important, and you must regard 
him as belonging to the whole world.’ 

‘I will do whatever you tell me.’ 

‘I never hoped that I should have such good' 
fortune.’ 

‘WOiy ?’ 

‘I was thinking that you must have forgotten me.* 

‘You were so insignificant !’ 

‘Before you I was — I still am.’ 

‘You have given me a new gift of poetry. I am. 
finding a fresh purpose, a fresh inspiration, in my 
poems. My Urvashi Viyog was inspired by you, the 
song as well as the play. I am naturalizing the drama 
in our country, Prabha ! But how could you imagine 
that I would forget you ?' 

‘How could I ever dream of being able to reach 
you ! When I came to learn all your qualities, one 
by one, I felt nothing but despair. And then I saw 
all the young beauties of Saket infatuated with you, 
one after the other ; that' was enough to deprive me 
of hope. Besides, I heard that you belonged to a 
very high Brahmin family, and although I may belong 



PRABHA 109 * 

to a Greek family which is included in the Rajput 
class, the highest after the Brahmins, how could my 
love be accepted by one of you Brahmin aristocrats, 
who never marry without investigating the bride’s- 
ancestry on both sides for seven generations ?’ 

‘I am sorry to think that is how I appeared to you, 
Prabha.’ 

‘So you. . her tongue faltered. 

‘Prabha !’ he exclaimed, kissing her wet eyes and 
pressing her to his breast. ‘Ashvaghosh will always- 
be yours. Even death cannot tzdce Hm from you.’ 

Tears were pouring from her eyes, and he wiped 
them away as he held her clasped in his arms. 

His play was performed excellently, several times- 
over, and was seen by all the wonder-struck citizens 
of Saket, who had never suspected that dramatic 
art could be so rich and lofty. After the final curtain 
Ashvaghosh repeatedly declared that he had done 
nothing but borrow from the Greek stage ; but his- 
play was so distinct in its Style that no one could trace 
any element of foreign influence in it. 

His songs and poems in Sanskrit and Prakrit had 
spread beyond the limits of Saket and even of Kosal ; 
his plays attained an even wider celebrity. They 
speedily found their way on to the stage in cities like 
Ujjain, Dashpur, Supparak, Bharukachchha, Shakla,. 
Taxila and Pafliputra where there were Greek colonies- 
and theatres, and became popular with the entire 
aristocracy and commercial class. 

IV 

That Ashvaghosh was appearing on the stage and 
was in love with a Greek girl, could not be kept hidden 



110 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

from his parents. His father was particularly disturbed 
by the news, and got Suvamakshi to try and make 
h.im understand his position. When his mother told 
him that such a marriage, for such a family as theirs, 
was forbidden by religion, Ashvaghosh drew on his 
Vedic lore and placed before her a mass of evidence 
•compiled from the precepts of the rishis. (Some of 
these he later collected in his Vajrachchhedika, which 
•is still to be found included among the texts of the 
Upanishadas.) But his mother only replied : ‘That 
lis all very well, my son, but we Brahmins today do 
not follow those antiquated customs.’ 

‘Then I shall introduce a new standard of good 
•conduct for Brahmins.’ 

His mother could not view his proceedings with any 
pleasure, but when he told her that he could not 
live without Prabha, she came over to his side, saying, 
‘My son, you are all I have.’ 

One day Ashvaghosh sent Prabha to visit his mother. 
When the latter saw that Prabha’s virtue and sweet- 
mess of temper equalled her beauty, she gave the 
:girl her blessing. 

But the father could not give way. He said plainly 
i:o Ashvaghosh one day : 

‘Our family holds a very high position in the 
JBrahmin community. For many generations, only 
hrides of the highest Brahmin families have entered 
-our house. If you stoop now to tShis marriage you 
desire, we and our descendants for ever will be polluted. 
-All our rank and dignity will be lost.’ 

But for. Ashvaghosh, to renounce Prabha was 
»un thinkable. 

His father then made ingratiating approaches to 



PRABHA 111 

Prabha’s parents, but it was of no avail. Finally he 
■went to Prabha herself and threw his head-cloth at 
her feet in token of appeal. Her only answer was that 
she would tzilk to Ashvaghosh about what he had said.. 

V 

Prabha and Ashvaghosh became inseparable 
companions. If one of them visited the river bank,, 
the park, the pilgrims’ fair-ground, the dance-theatre, 
the playhouse, or any other spot, the other was sixre to- 
be there too. His heart expanded 'in her presence 
like a fiovi^er in sunlight. In the radiance of the 
milk-white moon, the pair would often stroll beside 
the river, and there pass their time not in love-play 
only but in discussion of the many mysteries of life. 

One moonlit night, beside the dark flood of the 
Sara'yu, Ashvaghosh was drawing in his mind a 
picture of Prabha’s beauty as she sat on the glimmering' 
sand. Suddenly and impulsively he exclaimed ^ 
‘Prabha, you are my music ! It was your inspiration 
that made me write my Urvashi Viyog, and your beauty 
will help me to create so much beauty in poetry^ 
Poetry is not an externalization of inner feeling, but 
an inward expression of dungs around us. Yon 
have taught me the truth of that, love.’ 

As he spoke, Prabha stretched herself out on the 
cold sand. Ashvaghosh looked at her long, fresh tresses,, 
floating on the sand, and took her head on to his lap. 
She gazed up at the outline of his face, and when he- 
had finished speaking she said— 

‘I agree with all that you say. Yes, indeed, poetry 
cannot fulfil itself without the inspiration of sensuous 
beauty. I should have liked to make a picture oF 



112 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

you in poetical words, though all I can make is a 
■silent portrait, poetry is not mine to command. I 
told you that day that you mxist think of yourself as 
a double individual, and that you must think chiefly 
of the immortal Ashvaghosh, the great poet of the 
age, because he is not one person’s treasure, but the 
world’s treasure. You remember the words of that 
learned monk, whom we went to see two days ago, 
from the Kalkaram monastery ?’ 

‘He seemed remarkably intelligent.’ 

‘Yes, and he 'has travelled very widely. He was 
born in Egypt, at Alexandria.’ 

‘So I heard. There is one thing I can’t understand, 
dearest. Why do all the Greeks have such a respect 
for Buddhism ?’ 

‘Because it seems to harmonize with their character 
and their independent nature.’ 

‘But Buddhism tries to make everyone passionless, 
ascetic, monkish.’ 

‘Among Buddhists the monks are very few compared 
with the number of those living with their households, 
and they are second to none in recognizing the blessings 
of family life.’ 

‘After all, there are so many other religions in this 
country ; why should the Greeks admire Buddhism 
in particular ?’ 

‘It is the most liberal of all these religions. When 
our ancestors entered India, everyone called us bar- 
barians and looked down on us. I am not speaking 
only of the Greek invading armies ; the same 
treatment was given to Greeks who came to settle 
here, or for such purposes as trade. But Buddhists 
showed no contempt for them. Of course, the 



PRABHA m 

Greeks had got to know of Buddhism in their own 
■country.’ 

‘In Greece itself ?’ 

‘In the time of Ashoka, the grandson of Ghandra- 
gupta Maurya, a good many Buddhist monks made 
their way into Greek territories. The monk we niet, 
Dharmrakshit, did not become a monk after coming 
to India, he was already a monk in a monastery at 
Alexandria.’ 

‘I want to meet him again, Prabha.’ 

‘You must certainly meet him. He will talk to 
you about other deep problems. Only, darling, 
don’t let hearing this Buddhist turn you into an ascetic 
and make you give me up !’ She folded him in her 
arms, as if someone were trying to pull him away. 

‘There were some things about KaUcaram that 
seemed to me very attractive. The thought came into 
my head — ^what if all our country could be made like it ?’ 

‘No, darling !’ exclaimed Prabha, sitting up. ‘You 
mustn’t think of going into the monastery and leaving 
me!’ 

‘Leaving you, as long as I live 1 Impossible I I 
was just thinking about the absence of distinctions 
and divisions there. Imagine — there are learned 
monks of many lands, like the Greek Dharmrakshit 
or the Persian Suman, and along with them monks 
of our country, of every class from Brahmins to 
chandals, all of them living together, eating and 
drinking together, studying together. What is the 
name of that old dark-skinned monk at Kalkaram ?’ 

‘Mahasthavir Dharmsen. He is the head of all 
• the monks of the Saket monasteries.’ 

‘I think it would be very good if all the people of 



114 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

town and countryside abolished their differences as 
the monks of Kalkaram have done, and had no caste 
divisions or racial, divisions.’ 

‘There is one thing I have not told you, dearest. 
One day your father came and threw his head-cloth 
at my feet, and begged me to set you free.’ 

‘As if your setting me free would give him back 
his son ! What did you say to him, Prabha ?’ 

‘I only said I would talk about it to you.’ 

‘Well, you have talked to me. I feel a bottomless 
disgust at the hypocrisy of our Brahmins. I feel it 
until I bum all over. First they say that they believe 
in their holy scriptures ; well, I read through all 
their books, laboriously and 2 ealously. But what 
they really believe, I can’t discover. Perhaps they 
really only believe in their own self-iiiterest. When 
you confront them with a quotation from one of their 
ancient sages, they only say ; ‘Our customs nowadays 
are different.’ They should follow either custom, 
or the precepts of the sages — one or the other. Isn’t 
it only when someone has destroyed the old dispen- 
sation, that a new practice can come into existence ? 
They deserve to be known as a • timid, cowardly, 
selfish lot. All they want is fat meal to eat and fat 
endowments, and they are ready to do anything 
in the world to please the kings and princes who are 
their patrons.’ 

‘There is no place in their religion for the poor — 
and the low castes, as they call them, are always 
poor.’ 

‘Yes. They have recognized invading races like 
the Greeks, Sakas and Abhiras, as Kshatriyas — men 
of the princely caste — because these people had power 



PRABHA 115 

and wealth, and handsome donations could be ex- 
tracted from them ! But the menials, scavengers 
and slaves of our own country, these Brahmins have 
doomed to remain for ever in the dust. I think any 
religion a disgrace to humanity which does not elevate 
man’s heart, which classifies men according to the 
size of their purse or their stick. The world changes i 
I have studied the rules and practices laid down in 
Brahmin scriptures, from the most ancient to the 
newest, and I have seen a complete revolution taking 
place in them. But if you say as much today to the 
Brahmins, they want to persuade you that all those 
things are eternal and fixed. What stupidity it all 
is, darling !’ 

‘/have not become the cause of all these fiery ideas, 
Ashvaghosh ?’ 

‘Yes, you have, and I am grateful for it, Prabha. 
You have given new force and vitality to my poetry, 
and you are helping me very greatly by doing the 
same to my power of insight. I used to fancy that 
I had already drained the cup of knowledge. That 
is a false conceit that a Brahmin falls a victim to ton 
easily. But now I realize that knowledge is not limited 
to the Brahmin formulas, and their palm and birch- 
leaf volumes ; it is vaster than all of them.’ 

‘I am only a woman.’ 

‘Anyone who thinks a mere woman inferior to him 
deserves to be looked down on himself, in my opinion.’ 

‘Still, among the Greeks women are respected 
more than among others. Even if it means dying 
without children, a man can never remarry while his 
first wife is alive.’ 

‘And these Brahmins keep on marrying hundreds. 

9 



116 EAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

of women, simply to get money. Shameful ! I am glad 
that no Greeks follow the Brahmin religion.’ 

‘Even though we are Buddhists, Brahmins come to 
our house to perform ceremonies.’ 

‘When they have admitted the Greeks as Kshatriyas, 
for their own benefit, why should they hesitate to do 
that? It is a question of their fees.’ 

‘So it is not I who have dispelled your pride in your 
Brahminism ?’ 

‘No harm if you had. If Brahmin pride tries to 
come between me and you, I consider it a worthless, 
despicable thing.’ 

‘It makes me so happy to know that you love me 
so much, Ashvaghosh !’ 

‘Dearest ! If I lost your love, all my roots would 
wither.’ 

‘Then do you want to honour my love by making 
me a gift ?’ 

‘I will give away anything — except that love !’ 

‘If my love ever does the least harm to my immortal 
Ashvaghosh the great poet of the age, then it should 
be cursed.’ 

‘What do you mean, my beloved?’ 

‘I don’t want to put any obstacle in the way of our 
love, but I want it to help you in creating immortal 
things, and if I were to die. . . .’ 

Ashvaghosh sprang up as though suddenly beside 
himself, lifted Prabha, and strained her to his heart 
in a bear’s hug. She saw that his cheeks were wet. 
Over and over again she kissed him and repeated ‘My 
dear love’, and then, when he grew calmer, she said : 

‘Listen, dearest, I want you to give something very 
big in return for my love, and you must give it.* 



PRABHA 117 

‘There is nothing I cannot givej^ow, Prabha.’ 

‘But you didn’t even let me finish what I was 
going to say.’ 

‘You were trying to say something terrible.’ 

‘But I am forced to say this terrible thing, if I am 
to be a true friend to my immortal Ashvaghosh. My 
love wants my great poet to think of it as something 
as immortal as his own verses, and not to measure it by 
Prabha’s body. The Prabha who belongs to the im- 
mortal part of Ashvaghosh will have eternal youth 
and beauty. That is all I wanted to make you 
believe, from your heart.’ 

‘You want to put an ideal Prabha in front of me 
instead of my living Prabha ?’ 

‘I think them equally real, darling. It is only this, 
that one of them will live for fifty years or a hundred 
years, and the other will live for ever. Your Prabha 
will be immortal in your Urvashi Viyog, and to make 
my love immortal you must think of the immortal 
part of yourself. Now it has grown very late, the 
river bank seems to have fallen asleep. We should go 
home.’ 

‘I have been drawing a picture in my memory 
of the immortal Prabha.’ 

‘Dearest ! that is all I wanted to ask !’ She pressed 
her silken hair over his cheeks and stood there 
speechless. 


VI 

It was a big courtyard, with a colonnade running 
all round, and behind it the rooms of a three-storied 
building. In the colonnade some yellow clothes were 
drying on clothes-lines. In one corner of the court- 



118 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

yard was a well, with a bathing-place next to it. In 
the rest of the area were several trees, among them 
a pipal. Round the latter was built a platform, and 
surro unding this a stone balustrade with niches for 
hundreds of small clay lamps. 

Prabha knelt in prayer before this beautiful tree, 
and then said : ‘Dearest, it was a tree of this kind 
that the inspired Gautama was sitting under when 
by toilsome meditation he threw off all the perplexities 
of the soul and gained enlightenment, and came to 
be known as Buddha, the wise. It is simply for the 
sake of this sweet memory that we always bend our 
heads when we pass a pipal tree.’ 

‘By toilsome meditation he gained enlightenment! 
Such a living embodiment of wisdom deserves worship, 
Prabha ; to worship such an embodiment of wisdom 
is to revere one’s own struggle towards the soul’s 
triumph.’ 

They both went up to the Buddhist Abbot- He 
was sitting just now under a vaknl tree in the courtyard, 
where fresh flowers spread their sweet perfume. 
Prabha, like a Buddhist nun, saluted him by kneeling 
and putting her palms and forehead to the ground. 
Ashvaghosh greeted him respectfully, but remained 
standing. Then they took some skin rugs that were 
lying on the ground and sat down. The Abbot’s 
disciples, seeing that Ashvaghosh had come to hold 
a discussion with him, withdrew from there. After 
some ordinary talk that decorum required, Ashvaghosh 
broached the question of philosophy. 

‘Noble Brahmin,’ said the Abbot, ‘in the religions 
of the Buddhists, that is of their scholars, philosophy 
itself has been called a chain, and a very heavy chain.’ 



PRABHA 119 

‘Then, is there no place for philosophy in 
Buddhism ?’ 

‘Why no place ? Buddhism is a philosophical 
religion. Only Buddha said that philosophy should 
be a raft to carry one, not a burden to carry on one’s 
head.’ 

‘What did he mean — a raft ?’ 

‘Yes, when people come to a river and there is no 
boat, they build a raft to carry them across, but when 
they have got over they do not think themselves 
obliged by gratitude to lift up the logs and carry 
them on their shoulders.’ 

‘A man who was bold enough to say that, even for 
the sake of his religion, must certainly have seen the 
truth and felt its force. Abbot ! Explain to us what 
it is in Buddha’s philosophy, that would enable us by 
knowledge of it to grasp wisdom with our own 
minds.’ 

‘Disbelief in the soul, my son. The Brahmins 
believe that the soul is the eternal pole-star, the 
imperishable essence. In the Buddhist universe no 
such imperishable element exists ; hence this 
philosophy may be defined as one that dispenses 
with the soul, that sees everything as ephemeral, 
born one moment and vanishing the next.’ 

‘This idea by itself is enough for me. I honour 
the Enlightened One most fervently for proclaiming 
this religion, built like a raft, and this denial of the 
soul. I have found what I was seeking. I felt 
already inside myself some stirrings of the same thought, 
but I was never able to define them. If men today 
would only guide themselves aright by the teachings 
of Buddha, the world would be a different place.’ 



120 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

*True, my son, true. In our homeland, Greece, 
profound philosophers arose, Pythagoras and Hera- 
clitus among them, who lived at the same time as 
Buddha. Democritus, Plato, Aristotle came a little 
later. Those Greek philosophers thought deeply ; 
but, except for Heraclitus, none of them could get 
beyond the notion of immortality. Existence had 
an unbounded fascination for them, and therefore, 
they wanted to impose its shackles on all futurity. 
Heraclitus indeed thought of the universe as something 
which is in constant flux — never the same for two 
consecutive moments, in the same way as Buddha ; 
but there was an element of self-interest in his idea.’ 

‘How can self-interest enter into philosophical 
speculation ?’ 

‘The belly plays its part in everything, my son ! 
At that time our city of Athens was a republic, there 
was no kingship. At first political power was in the 
hands of aristocrats belonging to families like that 
of Heraclitus ; later on the merchant class pushed 
them aside and took the power into its own hands. 
Heraclitus was dissatisfied with tliis state of affairs. 
He longed for a revolution — not to carry progress 
further, but to put the clock back.’ 

‘We also need a revolution ; one that will carry us 
forward, not push us back. I think the past is dead, 
honoured monk !’ 

‘What you say is right, noble youth. Buddha 
wanted a revolution, one that would make the world 
a better place. He organized his community of 
monks as a kind of model for a world of tomorrow.’ 

‘Where there would be no division of classes, no 
high or low.’ 



PRABHA 121 

‘Where happiness and labour would be equal for 
all. Have you ever seen the great Dharmsen outside 
with his broom, sweeping ?’ 

‘That very dark man ?’ 

‘Yes. He is the loftiest of us all. Every day we 
kneel down before him in reverence'. He is the head 
of all the monasteries of Kosal.’ 

‘Is it true that he comes from the chandal caste ?’ 

‘A monastery takes no account of caste, my son. 
It regards only a man’s qualities. He is our head 
because of his learning and his virtue. He is our 
father. When he goes begging for alms, if he gets 
only just enough of something to grease his bowl, 
so to say, he will never eat without giving a share to 
his companions. That is what Buddha taught. 
All our property belongs to us in common except for 
three robes, a clay begging-bowl, a needle, a drinking- 
pot, a comb and a girdle. All the rest — house, 
garden, benches, stools — all belong to our community. 
Some of our monasteries also own land. We examine 
a man thoroughly before admitting him, but once 
he has become a monk, a member of the community, 
he is the equal of all.’ 

‘What if such a community were organized to 
include the entire nation ?’ 

‘How could that be, my son ? When will kings 
and rich men submit to equality with others ? Some 
monks admitted a slave into their fellowship. As 
a member, he ceased to be a slave and was the equal 
of his brethren. But his owner began to raise an 
outcry, and the other slave-owners supported him. 
The king himself was master of thousands of slaves. 
How could he tolerate such a blow at his property ? 



122 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

What could Buddha do ? He had to lay down that 
henceforth no slave was to be admitted into the 
community. Our community is a little island in an 
ocean full of classes and inequalities, it cannot be 
secure so long as poverty and slavery exist in the world.’ 

vn 

It was a full-moon night in autumn. Since early 
evening the white saucer of the moon had been afloat 
over the eastern horizon, and as the sun’s last red rays, 
glowing on the horizon, faded from the sky, the cold 
white moonbeams flowed over it. Ashvaghosh spent 
most of his time now at Prabha’s house. The pair 
were sitting on the flat roof. 

‘Dearest,’ said Prabha, ‘the waves of the Sarayu 
are calling me, those waves that first brought me in 
contact with you, that bound us together in love. 
Two years have gone by since then, but it seems as 
if it happened only today. How many moonlit 
nights we have passed on the river bank, and how 
sweet they always are ! Tonight the spring moon 
is here again. Gome, let us go to the river !’ 

They went off together. The river flowed at some 
distance from the city. They walked a long way 
on white sand gleaming in the moonlight. Prabha 
was carrying her slippers in her hand, it was pleasant 
to feel the sand crushing under her feet. 

‘How delightful it is, the touch of this river-sand !’ 
she exclaimed, putting her arms around Ashvaghosh. 

‘It tickles one’s feet.’ 

‘An exquisite feeling — ^it makes all one’s hair 
prickle ! Dear River Sarayu !’ 

‘I have thought sometimes, darling, that we ought 



PRABHA 


123 


to run away together. Run away to a coxmtry where 
there will be no one to spite our love, where you can 
inspire me and I can make songs for us to sing together 
to the veena. Here I can’t bring my veena out to the 
sands on nights like this. People would come, and 
some of them would have eyes black with spite.’ 

‘Don’t take it ill — but it seems to me sometimes 
that if I were to die . . . . ’ 

Ashvaghosh held her tightly in his arms as he cried — 

‘No, darling ! Never ! We shall go on as we are !’ 

‘I mean something different. Just think — ^if you 
were to die, I should be left all alone. That does 
happen in the world, doesn’t it ?’ 

‘Yes, it happens.’ 

‘You were not upset at the thought of your own 
death, Ashvaghosh ! And why ? Because if I lost 
you, all the mountain of grief would fall on me alone !’ 

‘It is a very cruel way of treating me to say such 
things, Prabha.’ 

Prabha kissed him on the lips and comforted him. 

‘Life has many faces,’ she said. ‘It is not always 
full moon ; there are also moonless nights. I was 
only saying : if one of us were lost, what ought the 
other to do ? Do you know what I should do if I 
lost you ?’ 

His head sank and he gave a long sigh. ‘Tell 
me.’ 

‘I should never put an end to my own life. The 
divine Buddha said that suicide was a foolish and 
blameworthy act. You know I have made myself 
quite skilful with the veena.' 

‘Very. How often I have given you the veena and 
gone on singing to it, forgetting everything else.’ 



124 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

‘Well, if that happens, my mortal Ashvaghosh will 
have been taken away from me, but I can still give 
myself up to the immortal Ashvaghosh, the poet of the 
ages. I will play your veena and sing your songs, 
through all India and in foreign lands ; all my life, 
until the streams of our existences are reborn in another 
clime, another age, and reunited with one another. 
And what will you do, dearest, if I die ?’ 

At these words Ashvaghosh trembled in every 
limb, in every fibre ; Prabha could feel his body 
shaking. He struggled to speak, but his throat was 
constricted, his eyes were bursting with tears. After 
wrestling with himself for some moments he said, 
brokenly — 

‘It will be a terrible hour ! But I too, Prabha, will 
not kill myself. I will sing whatever song the spark 
of your love kindles in my heart, to the end of my 
life. Your immortal Ashvaghosh. . . .’ 

He stopped, unable to bring out another word. 

‘The river has gone to sleep, dearest. Let us go back.* 

vin 

During the hot season, Suvarnakshi fell ill. 
Ashvaghosh was at his mother’s bedside day and 
night, and Prabha also stayed there all through the 
day. Medicines had no effect, the patient only grew 
worse. The full-moon night came, and shed its milky 
whiteness. Suvarnakshi asked them to carry her up 
into the moonlight. Her bed was made for her on 
the roof. By now she was mere skin and bone; 
her son’s heart ached as he sat by her. 

‘How beautiful the moonlight is !’ said the sick 
woman, in feeble but clear tones. 



PRABHA 


125 

As she spoke he seemed to hear Prabha’s words 
again : ‘The waves of the Sarayn are calling me’ — 
and a shiver ran through him. 

‘Where is Prabha ?’ asked his mother. 

‘She has gone home, mother. She was here until 
evening.’ 

‘Prabha. . .daughter. My son, never leave 
her ’ 

Before she could finish, a fit of coughing came on, 
and after two spasms her body lay cold and motion- 
less. 

Suvarnakshi' was gone, and her son’s heart was 
breaking. All night long he wept. 

Next day until noon he was busy with his mother’s 
funeral rites. Then he thought of Prabha. He went 
to Duttmitra’s house. Prabha’s parents were under 
the impression that she had been with him. Ashva- 
ghosh’s mind was still in a fever from the blow that 
had fallen on him the night before ; now he grew 
more agitated still. He went into Prabha’s bed- 
room. Everything was in order. He lifted the white 
sheet firom the bed and under it was a painting of 
himself. Prabha had had it made by a Greek artist 
who happened to come that way, and the reluctant 
Ashvaghosh had had to spend hours sitting to him. 
On the picture lay a garland of fresh jasmine. Under- 
neath was a folded palm-leaf letter in Prabha’s hand- 
writing. Ashvaghosh picked it up, the dark clay 
seal on the string round it was still damp. He cut 
the string and kept the seal. When he unfolded the 
long sheet, he found only a few lines of Prabha’s fine 
writing. 

‘Dearest, Prabha is taking leave of you. The 



126 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

Sarayu’s waves have called me, and I am going 
away. You gave me a promise in return for my 
love, do you remember ? I am going away, leaving 
you my immortal youth and my unchanging beauty. 
Now you will never have to look at a Prabha with 
grey hair, decayed teeth and sagging hips. My 
love and my eternal youth will remain to inspire 
you. Never close your eyes to their messages. Do 
not think, dearest, that I am putting an end to my 
life because of the scoldings of your family ; I am 
only offering you my youth, still unblemished, to 
inspire your poetry. Dearest, Prabha embraces 
you and kisses you with her spirit, for the last 
time.’ 

Ashvaghosh had to wipe the tears from his eyes 
several times before he could finish the letter. The 
letter fell from his hands and he sat down on the bed ; 
his heart was numbed, and he sat plunged in 
abstraction, as if waiting for its beating to end al- 
together, gazing before him with empty eyes like a 
clay figure. Prabha’s parents, after waiting for him 
for some time, entered the room, and were alarmed 
to find him in this condition. They saw the letter 
lying near him, and read it. The mother gave a 
stifled cry like an animal, and slipped to the floor. 
Duttmitra was speechless, tears- flowed from his eyes. 
Ashvaghosh was still staring with the same fixed look. 
Seeing him like this, the others after a long time went 
out silently Evening came, night fell, Ashvaghosh 
was still sitting there. His eyes were dry, his heart 
seemed frozen. Late in the night he dropped off 
to sleep where he sat. 

In the morning Prabha’s mother came and found 



PRABHA 


127 

him composedly sitting and thinking. She asked 
him how he felt. 

‘I am quite well now, mother. I shall do the 
work that Prabha entrusted to me. I did not under- 
stand ; but she knew. She has shown me my duty. 
She has given me life, not death. I might turn this 
gift of life into suicide, but I cannot be guilty of such 
ingratitude.’ 

The mother understood what he was feeling. 

'Where are you going, my son ?’ she asked as he 
stood up. 

'I want to meet the Buddhist Abbot and look at 
the Sarayu.’ A lump came into his throat as he 
answered. 

‘Abbot Dharmrakshit is waiting for you below, 
and to look at the Sarayu, I myself will come with 
you.’ She could not utter a single word more. 

Ashvaghosh went down and knelt respectfully in 
front of the Abbot Dharmrakshit, saying — 

‘Abbot ! Admit me into your community.’ 

‘Son, your sorrow is great.’ 

‘It is great ; but it is not that that makes me speak. 
Prabha has made me ready for this. I am not hurrying 
into it blindly.’ 

‘Still, you will have to wait for some days, the 
community will not admit you hastily.’ 

‘I will wait. Abbot ; but let me stay under the 
protection of the monastery.’ 

‘First you must take your father’s permission. No 
one is accepted as a monk without his parent’s consent.’ 

‘Then I shall go and take permission.’ 

Ashvaghosh left the building. Prabha’s mother, 
who was uneasy in her mind even at hearing his 



i28 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

apparently sane words, had followed him. They 
took a boat together and spent all day searching the 
river '^down-stream. Next day they descended the 
river still further, but not a trace was to be found. 

Ashvaghosh went home and asked his father’s 
permission to become a monk ; but his father was 
naturally unwilling to give up his only son. Then 
Ashvaghosh said : 

Tt is not because I am overwhelmed with grief 
for my mother and Prabha that I am doing this, 
father. This is the road by which I can fulfil the 
task I have chosen in life. You can see that there 
is no sign of mental derangement in my voice and my 
behaviour. I have only to tell you this, father, that 
if you want me to go on living, you must give me the 
permission I ask for.’ 

Next day, in the evening, with tear-filled eyes, 
his father consented. 

The community of the Saket sect of Buddhists 
admitted Ashvaghosh as a monk. Mahasthavir 
Dharmsen himself became his preceptor, and Dharm- 
xakshit his guide. The latter was then about to go by 
boat to Patliputra. Ashvaghosh left Saket with 
him. 

IX 

In the monastery at Patliputra, the monk Ashvaghosh 
passed ten years. Along with the Buddhist religion, 
he acquired a profound knowledge of Buddhist and 
Greek philosophy. He won a high place among the 
learned men of the religious fraternity in Magadh. 
It was at this time that the Shak king Kanishk, 
advancing victoriously from the west, reached 



PRABHA 


129 


Patliputra. Patliputra and Magadh were distin- 
guished centres of Buddhism, for which Kanishk had a 
deep respect. He wanted to find some able and 
learned monk to accompany him to Gandhara. 
Ashvaghosh was chosen by the brethren for the 
mission. 

Arrived at the. capital, Purushpur, Ashvaghosh 
found himself in a place where Sakya, Greek, 
Turki, Persian and Indian cultures mingled with 
one another. Ashvaghosh had formerly introduced 
the Greek drama into Indian literature. Now, 
after mature examination of Greek philosophy, 
he took many of its peculiar features, its analytical 
method and cognate elements, and with these 
borrowings enriched the philosophy of India, or rather 
of Buddhism. It was he who opened a new road 
forward for the Buddhists from Greek speculation. 
Then other Indian thinkers were forced to foUow 
suit. The Vaisheshika and Nyaya schools were those 
which made most progress. The atomic theory ; 
concepts such as identity and universality ; ontology, 
syllogistic logic, and so on, were among their borrowings 
from the Greeks. 

Prabha had widened his mind, and the Buddhist 
Ashvaghosh had no thought- of self-isolation. Inspired 
by her memory he wrote various poems, plays and 
stories, some of which were later lost- Yet Nature 
seems to' have watched over him with special care : 
seventeen hundred years later the great Gobi desert 
of Central Asia yielded up his play Saripuira. His 
Life of Buddha and Saundaranand are immortal poems. 
They were not only a splendid fulfilment of his promise 
to Prabha and her unfaded beauty, but gave to his poetry 



130 RAHUL SANKRITYAYAN 

its highest graces. His works immortalized his native 
Saket and his mother Suvarnakshi ; he always signed 
his works as 'Ashvaghosh, son of the noble Suvarnakshi 
of Saket’. 



BHABANI BHATTACHARYA 
Desperate Women 

‘TTOLD your fretful feet away from the well !’ Lachmi 

•‘•warned her son, Nago, as he flew a red-and-green 
kite and his three-foot figure dashed about, the reel 
gripped in his small hands, eyes fixed skyward. Then 
she faced again the hot, assaulting tongues of her 
visitors, the wrathful women of the village grouped 
in her sunlit front yard, and she moved her large 
timid eyes from one to another as though she begged 
for understanding, for compassion, saying in a mur- 
mur : ‘He is my husband. What can I do ? Tell 
me, sister. Just tell me.’ 

None pitied her, no face softened. ‘Let me tell 
you, then,’ a knife-like voice rasped. ‘If he, the 
bania, were one of my household, I would add grit 
to the kneaded flour of his bread and salt to his milk 
and let him go foodless.’ 

‘In every way I’d make his life miserable till he 
cried to the Mother of Mercy !’ rang another voice, 
no less belligerent. 

The youngest of the battle-group, Meera Bai, chimed 
in : ‘I’d red chilli-seeds in his pot of mustard 
oil. Let him rub his limbs with the oil for his early- 
morning bath, till he smarts, and let some drops get 
into his cyes—wah!' Meera Bai clapped her hands 
excitedly. She was a strapping girl of seventeen, who 
had been wed to the carpenter of a neighboumg 
village and had come to her parents on a brief visit. 

A hush fell. The idea of the corpulent bania, eyes 
red and swollen, grunting and groaning like a tortured 

10 



132 BHABANI BHATTAGHARYA 

bear, stirred their fancy. And this one, this Lachmi, 
his sprig of a wife who had no grit to flout her man’s 
stubborn will, no spine to withstand him in the good 
cause of village solidarity. 

Solidarity — ^the war-cry of the age ! Often in the 
past decade, with the mounting tempo of the peasants’ 
struggle the women, no dumb dnidges as in the days 
of old, had united under that rallying cry and defied' 
the Red Turbans, the landlord’s watchmen armed to 
the teeth. And in the big demonstrations against 
the forces of tyranny Lachmi had played her part. 
Never had she shown fear or held back. 

But' this time the fight was against her husband. 
It was a matter touching the whole village community. 
Private sentiments could not apply. Lachmi must 
surely see the point. 

Lachmi realized all that. Loyalties clashed within 
her — ^to stand by her village that had been wronged, 
or stand by her husband against whom all hearts were 
set, like edged flint. There never had been a stronger, 
more rightful cause. The bania had transgressed the 
prime canons of decency. He was a true villain of 
the piece. 

He had cornered the cloth supply. Not a yard 
had he sold to the village folk, storing it up, hoarding 
all that came from town. More, he had bought up 
well in advance the full output of the village weaver, 
Dhanna Ram, who had been forced to mortgage his 
loom to the ‘image of infamy’ to get the cash he needed 
to find himself a likely bride. Half the village was 
neck-deep in debt to the bania, and tethered, helpless, 
to his fat ruthless rate of interest. Not that he could 
be assailed on that account — ^it was the rate claimed 



DESPERATE WOMEN 133 

by his forefathers in the past thousand-and-one 
years, and why must he not, in all propriety, be 
faithful to that family tradition ? But to keep back 
the cloth supply for well over a year and speed the 
people towards the doom of nakedness — that surely 
was another matter ! 

The saris the women wore these days ! Held 
together by a hundred stitches and patches. And 
to save these further wear many slept naked at night, 
so it was said. The older women wore no half-blouse 
under the sari folds, and the younger ones made 
jackets out of cast-off grain-bags, yielding their tender 
skin to that coarseness. Then up went the price of 
old grain-bags ! 

The women had decided to stage a demonstration 
by marching through the village, gathering at the 
door of the bania’s storehouse on the riverside, stamping 
their feet and all shouting together, ‘We want cloth ! 
We want cloth !’ 

An old technique applied to a new objective ! 
And the bania would understand. He too had 
marched in demonstrations under the Congress banner, 
clad in homespun khadiy a white Gandhi cap poised 
on his head. The bania was aware of the time-spirit. 
He woxild bend before the pressure of the people’s will. 

But if he didn’t — what then ? 

Meera Bai had offered a solution : ‘If things shape 
that way a desperate remedy will be needed. We’ll 
strip off our tattered garments and fling them at his 
feet, forcing him to look at us. ‘ “See us ? See what 
you have done to your sisters and mothers by your 
evil hoarding and profiteering ?” we’ll cry. That, 
will teach him a lesson !’ 



134 


BHABANI BHATTACHARYA 


‘That’s the talk !’ The women had voiced their 
approval, dazed by the novelty and rashness of the 
idea, yet admiring the grit of Meera Bai and eager to 
shine in the reflected light of her boldness. 

With them they would take Lachmi, too, they 
decided. Not that Lachmi had suffered from her 
husband’s foul scheme. That was all the more reason 
why she must add her strength to this struggle. It 
was a cause of the people. In a small way it was 
a cause of the coimtry. 

But Lachmi, who had stood her ground before the 
loaded muskets of the Red Turbans, was timid where 
her husband was concerned. Dead scared of him ! 
An inhibited slave of his domineering will ! And 
if ever a cloud of revolt disturbed her placid face, 
he had only to twirl his heavy black moustache and 
glare threateningly at her, and she felt squashed. For 
lean days had come upon her father in the past and 
there had been no way out save to mortgage his corn- 
land to his son-in-law. What would be his lot if, in a 
blaze of anger, the son-in-law decided to foreclose 1 

‘Listen. To please you all I’ll stuff the ear-holes 
of the evil-hearted one with fine sawdust, if only Meera 
will get me a handful from her carpenter,’ said Lachmi, 
laughing, trying to lighten the tension. 

But the women were relentless. ‘We put this to 
you, Lachmi, sister, for the last time,’ they said'. 
‘Will you come with us ? Yes or no ?’ 

Lachmi drew a deep breath and mumbled a half- 
answer, but her words were lost in a scream and a 
high shrilling cry : ‘Nago ! Nago’s fallen into the 
well !’ A woman, watching the progress of the red- 



DESPERATE WOMEN 135 

and-green kite in the air, had seen the boy race back 
excitedly, trip against the well’s broken, foot-high 
parapet and plunge in. 

‘Nago’s gone down into the well !’ A dozen women 
with horror-stricken faces instantly echoed the cry. 

Lachmi stood rigid. Crazy black discs whirled 
before her eyes and were lost in utter darkness, while 
the life-sap seemed suddenly to ooze from her limbs 
like warm sweat. A moment more, and she tore 
herself from her stupor. ‘Nago — o !’ she wailed, 
rushing to the well, her eyes enormous with madness, 
‘Nago— o 1’ 

Two women seized her at the well’s edge. While 
she struggled and raved all eyes were turned on 
Meera, cool as ice, tightening her sari about her 
waist, tucking up the folds. A rope and a bucket 
hung from the pulley. Meera calmly stepped into 
the bucket, while a dozen women hung on to the 
rope. 

‘Pull me up when I tug twice,’ said Meera, clutching 
at the rope and standing poised in the bucket. *I 
hope the rotten woodwork won’t give way,’ she 
murmured, sudden fear leaping into her eyes, as 
slowly the bucket descended into the dark depths. 

Pulses pounded. Faces, tense, peered down over 
the low parapet. All were silent save for the distraught 
mother, who kept on moaning ‘Nago — o !’ 

‘Save the boy, Mother of Mercy !’ Every woman, 
poor as they all were, cried out, promising the goddess 
five annas’ worth of libation — rieep-red hibiscus, and 
milk-sweets and vermilion. 

An eternity dragged by till at last the signal came 
and the women planted their feet firmly and pulled. 



136 BHABANI BHATTACHARYA 

What if Meera came out empty-handed ? . . . There 
she was at last, and a cry of joy went up. She had the 
boy flung sack-wise over her shoulder. 

Lachmi grabbed her child. He breathed ! All 
was well. The women wept with joy. 

When Nago was tucked in bed, Lachmi brought 
Meera a sari and a jacket of her own. 

The demonstration set out later and, as the women 
stood stamping their feet in front of the bania’s store 
and shouting ‘We want cloth !’, the man himself came 
out and said, a crooked smile on his smooth, plump 
face : ‘I am not deaf. Why tire your throats ? Let one 
of you step into my office and talk — any one of you.’ 

The women, hushed, looked at one another, then all 
looked at Meera Bai, a mere seventeen-year-old, yet 
a born leader, bold and sensible. In her the crafty 
bania would at last meet his match. And when she, 
cool as ice again, slipped into the bania’s office and 
the door closed behind her, it was as though she had 
descended once more into the dark depths of the welL 
Would she emerge with the fruit of her seeking, or 
empty-handed ? 

It was hardly five minutes before the door was 
flung open and out rushed Meera angrily, her eyes 
bitter, her breast heaving with sharp-drawn breath. 
Plainly the mission had failed. But what had happen- 
ed ? It was some time before Meera could tell them 
coherently. She had used their last weapon — the 
threat to strip in his presence-r-and the bania had 
merely, and smugly, waited for her to do it ! 

As the women walked home, sore from their stamping 
and bitterly disappointed, they saw the slight figure 



DESPERATE WOMEN 137 

of Lachmi hurrying towards them. She asked no 
questions. Her grateful eyes took in Meera’s face. 
‘Nago has taken some hot milk,’ she murmured,, 
and added quickly : ‘Come, we can’t be beaten. 
I won’t be left out.’ 

‘No !’ Meera declined fiercely, but Lachmi per- 
sisted : ‘Give me a chance, sister,’ and the women, 
with hope rekindled, followed her. 

‘We want cloth !’ they raised the cry once more. 
*We want cloth !’ 

‘Back again ?’ the bania sneered, thrusting his stout 
face in the doorway. ‘Gome in, any one of you. 
Just one.’ 

Lachmi stepped in. An assistant was sorting some 
cloth. ‘Quit !’ the bania ordered peremptorily. 

‘Our Nago,’ Lachmi began, but the bania had 
already heard of the incident since news in the village 
travels fast. ‘I was about to rush home,’ he said, 
‘when this bale of mill cloth arrived. Tomorrow, at 
sun-up, a mason will start repairing the well.’ Then 
he lifted a warning finger. ‘Do not plead for those 
comrades of yours. It will be useless. Meera — ^brave 
girl — ^has had her reward. I noticed she was wearing 
a new sari of yours. Go home, wife. You shouldn’t 
have come here.’ 

Then Lachmi took the perilous plunge. ‘Mark 
my words,’ she said. ‘If you do not sell your cloth 
stock to the village, I’ll strip off my sari and bare 
myself.’ 

The bania was first amazed at her temerity, then 
he threw back his head and laughed— laughed till 
the tears came. ‘You will do that — you, Lachmi, 
my lawful wife !’ 



138 BHABANI BHATTAGHARYA 

‘Yes,’ she cried. ‘I will do it.’ 

‘You, the proud mother of my son— !’ 

‘Yes,’ she insisted. ‘I, the proud mother of your 
son.’ 

Gold black marbles gleamed as he fixed his eyes 
upon her in an iron stare. She saw the menace in 
those eyes, and she saw far beyond them. She saw 
Meera emerge, panting, from the depths of the well, 
one arm clinging precariously to the pulley-rope, the 
other wound about Nago across her shoulder. 

And Lachmi did not flinch. She had no fear at all. 
She clutched the upper part of her sari and tore it aside. 

Gould that brother of an ass, his assistant, be peering 
in ? His face contorted with suspicion and distress, the 
bania heaved himself up and placed his bulk before 
the door, and crying with a sudden switch-over to 
emotion, ‘Wifeling. . . 

Lachmi shook her head. ‘Don’t plead. It will 
be useless,’ she said, her slim finger on the edges of her 
blouse. 

His angry voice whipped out ; ‘Enough ! Have 
your way. Strip — strip if you must ! — then pick up 
your clothes and put them on and go home like a good 
girl.’ 

A gust of laughter shook her small frame, but she 
stopped it, biting her lip. How could she have ever 
feared this simple-hearted one, her husband ? 

‘I’ll leave you my sari, a good new one, to be hoarded 
with the five hundred others in your collection. 
Naked, I’ll go from this room. Naked, I’ll walk the 
village street, back home.’ 

He scratched the black bristles of his moustache 



DESPERATE WOMEN 


139 


and his face grew very pale. A long while he stared 
at his wife, as she stood composed, then he hung his 
head. The instrument of his power over her gone 
to pieces, he felt strangely forlorn, helpless. Then, 
with a deep sigh, he reconciled himself to the ruthless 
turning of the wheel of his kismet. 

‘Very well, you have your way,’ he said. ‘Let 
this cloth stock go to those owl-faced ones.’ And he 
raised his voice, calling to his assistant. ‘Put out the 
cloth for sale.’ 

^Lachmi Bai hi jai the excited women cried when 
they heard him. ‘Lachmi has brought us victory 
again,’ the triumphant village women who had stood 
listening by the door with bated breath and caught 
every word of the fateful talk, now cried out in unison. 



K. AHMAD ABBAS 
Sparrows 

•^HE sun was setting behind the mango grove 
which fringed the western extremity of the village 
when Rahim Khan returned from the fields. Broad 
and strong despite his fifty odd years, with the plough 
on his shoulders, and driving his two oxen, he walked 
through the main street of the village with a haughty 
and unfriendly air. As he approached the chaupal 
where a dozen or so peasants were collected for their 
evening smoke, the hilarious tones of gossip died 
down to cautious whispers. It was only when he 
had vanished round the corner and the heavy tread 
of his footsteps was heard no more than Kallu, passing 
the communal hookah to another, remarked, ‘There 
goes the hard-hearted devil !’ To which Nanha, the 
fkt sweet-seller, added: ‘He is getting worse and worse 
every day. Only yesterday he beat poor Ramoo’s 
child for throwing a pebble at his oxen.’ Ramnath, 
the officious zaildar, volunteered further details of 
Rahim Khan’s recent cruelties. ‘And the other day 
he very nearly killed my mare for straying into his 
field.’ The zaildar, of course, thought it quite 
irrelevant to mention that the straying of his 
mare had been specially planned by his own mischie- 
vous sons. The old grey-haired patcl was, as usual, 
the last to open his toothless mouth. And as usual, 
his words were prefaced by a pious invocation to 
the Almighty. ‘HariRam ! HariRam !’ he muttered, 
‘I have never seen such a cruel man. He has com- 
passion neither for the child nor for the helpless 



SPARROWS 141 

animal. No wonder his own sons have run away 
from home.’ 

The subject of their conversation, meanwhile, had 
reached his hut which, almost symbolically, stood 
gaunt and aloof, at a distance from the neighbouring 
cluster of houses. Leaning the plough up against the 
low wall of his house, he proceeded to tie the oxen 
to a pair of big wooden stakes embedded in the ground 
just in front of the doorway. 

‘Bhai Rahim Khan I’ an obsequious voice said 
behind him as he was about to enter the house. 

‘What is it ?’ he gruffly queried, turning round to 
address the old woman who had come out of the 
house nearest his own. As she hesitated to speak 
he fired a volley of questions : ‘What is it ? I won’t 
eat you. Why don’t you speak, woman? Has your 
son been arrested again for revenue arrears or has. 
your daughter-in-law delivered another baby ?’ 

As he stopped for breath, the woman summoned 
up all her courage to utter two words, ‘Your wife. 

‘ . . . has run away.’ He completed the sentence with 
a grin, which broadened with the realization that he 
had guessed right. 

‘No, no,’ the woman hastily explained with an 
apologetic look, as if she herself were responsible for 
his wife’s absence. ‘She has only gone to her brother 
at Nurpur and will be back in a few days.’ 

‘Bah !’ he flung back at her, opening the door. 
He knew that his wife would never come back. 

Seething with inward wrath he entered the dark 
hut and sat down on the charpoy. A cat mewed in a 
corner. Finding no one else on whom to vent his anger 
he flung it out, slamming the door with violence. 



142 


K. AHMAD ABBAS 

There was no one to give him water to wash his 
dust-laden feet and hands, no one to give him supper, 
no one whom he could curse and beat. Rahim Khan 
felt uncomfortable and unhappy. He had always 
been angry with his wife when she was there, but her 
absence angered him still more. 

*Sp she’s gone,’ he mused, lying down on the cot, 
having decided to go to sleep without his food. During 
the thirty years of their married life he had always 
felt that she would leave him one day and, at one 
time, he had even hoped she would. Six years ago, 
his eldest son Bundu had run away from home because 
of a more than usually severe beating. Three years 
later, the younger one, Nuru, joined his brother. 
Since that day, Rahim Khan felt sure his wife too 
would run away to her brother’s house. But now 
that she had gone, he felt unhappy — ^not sorry, no, 
for he had never loved his wife — ^but only uncomfort- 
able, as if a necessary piece of furniture had been 
removed. With her gone, on whom could he shower 
the outpourings of an embittered heart ? 

For thirty years his wife had been both the symbol 
and target of all his grievances against family, against 
society, against life. 

As a youth there had been none in the village to 
beat him in feats of athletic skill — ^in wrestling, in 
kabadi, in diving from the canal bridge. He had 
loved a girl, and had wanted to join a touring circus 
which happened to pass through the village. In the 
circus, he had felt, lay the key to his ambitions — a. 
career after his own heart — ^travel — ^fame. And in 
Radha, the daughter of Ram Charan, the village 
banya, he thought he had found his soul-mate. He 



SPARROWS 143 

had first noticed her watching him at a wrestling 
match and it had been the greatest moment of his life 
when, standing up after vanquishing his adversary, 
he had found Radha looking at him with the light of 
love in her eyes. After that there had been a few 
brief and fxurtive meetings when the unlettered but 
romantic youth had declared his love in passionate 
though halting words. But his parents had killed 
both ambitions. Circus work was too lowly and 
immoral for a respectable peasant. Anyway, his 
father, grandfather and all his ancestors had tilled 
the land, so he too had to do it. As for marrying 
Radha, a Hindu, a Kafir, the very idea was infamous 
and irreligious. 

For some time, Rahim Khan, with youthful 
resentment, toyed with the idea of open rebellion. 
But the tradition of centuries of serfdom ran in his 
blood and, however indignant he might have felt at 
his father’s severity, he could not summon enough 
courage to defy paternal authority and social traditions. 
After a few days, the circus left the village without 
Rahim Khan, and the furtive romance with Radha, 
too, came to an abrupt end. Rahim Khan’s father 
slyly suggested to Ram Gharan that his daughter was 
now fifteen and ought to have been married long ago, 
not failing to hint at the disastrous consequences 
of late marriages. Within a few weeks Radha was 
married to Ram Lai, a middle-aged, pot-bellied 
banya of the neighbouring village. With a few sad 
tears shed in the solitude of the night in memo^ of 
her hopeless romance with Rahim Khan, she quickly 
reconciled herself to her fate and proceeded forthwith 
to be the mother of half-a-dozen children. 



144 


K. AHMAD ABBAS 

Rahim Khan also married- He had, of course, no 
choice in the matter. His parents selected the girl, 
fixed the date, ordered some gaudy clothes for him 
and some silver ornaments for his bride, sat him on a 
horse and, to the beat of a brass band, took him to the 
girl’s house where the Nikah was duly performed. 
To the Kazi’s formal questions Rahim Khan mechani- 
cally nodded his head. Any other course was impos- 
sible. Nobody, of coursi, cared to ask the shy little 
girl who sat huddled in a dark room only dimly 
conscious of the fate to which she had been condemned. 
After the ceremony, Rahim Khan’s father, in a mood 
of self-congratulation, boasted to his wife : 'See how 
meekly he obeyed me. You always feared he might 
refuse to fall in with our arrangements. I know these 
yoimgsters. They are apt to be restless if their mar- 
riage is delayed. That is why our fathers believed 
in marrying away their children early. Now he will 
be all right !’ 

At that very moment, standing on the threshold of 
the room where his wife awaited him much as a 
sheep awaits the butcher, Rahim Khan made a terrible 
resolve to avenge himself on his parents, his family, 
on society. He held them all responsible for the 
frustration of his life’s dreams. And in his confused, 
illogical mind he regarded his bride as the symbol of 
the persecution to which he had been subjected. On 
her he would wreak his vengeance. Iron entered 
his hitherto kindly soul as he rudely pushed open the 
door. 

That was thirty years ago, Rahim Khan reflected 
as he lay there on his cot in the dark hut. And hadn’t 
he had his revenge ? For thirty years he had ill- 



SPARROWS 145 

treated his wife, his children and his bullocks, quarrelled 
with everyone in the village and made himself the 
most hated person in the whole community. The 
thought of being so universally detested gave him 
grim satisfaction. 

No one in the village, of course, understood or 
tried to understand the reasons for this strange trans- 
formation of the cheerful and kind young man into 
the beast that he had become. At first, their atti- 
tude towards him was one of astonished hostility, 
but later it changed to indifference mingled with 
fear. Of understanding and sympathy he received 
none. Shunned by everyone, with a bitterness ever 
gnawing at his heart, Rahim Khan sought conso- 
lation in the unquestioned authority over his wife 
which society allowed him. 

For thirty years his wife had submitted to his 
persecution with the slave-like docility that is the 
badge of her tribe. Lately, indeed, she had become 
so used to corporal chastisement that it seemed un- 
natural if a whole week passed without a beating. 
To Rahim Khan beating his wife had become a 
part of his very existence. As sleep gathered round 
him, his last thought was whether he would be able 
to endure a life without having an opportunity of 
indulging in what had now become his second nature. 
It was perhaps the only moment when Rahim Khan 
had a feeling, not exactly of affection, for his wife, but 
of loneliness without her. Never before had he realized 
how much the woman he hated was a part of his life. 

When he awoke it was already late forenoon and 
he started the day by cursing his wife, for it was she 
who used to wake him early every morning. But he 



146 K. AHMAD ABBAS 

was in no great hurry today. Lazily he got up 
and, after his ablutions, milked the goats for his break- 
fast which consisted of the remains of the previous 
day’s chapattis soaked in the fresh milk. Then he 
sat down for a smoke, with his beloved hookah beside 
him. Now the hut was warm and alight with the rays 
of the sun streaming in through the open window. 
In a corner they revealed some cobwebs and, having 
already decided to absent himself from his fields, he 
thought he would tidy his hut. Tying some rags to the 
end of the long pole, he was about to remove the cobwebs 
when he saw a nest in the thatched roof. Two sparrows 
were fluttering in and out, twittering constantly. 

His first impulse was to wreck the nest with one 
stroke of his pole, but something within him made 
him desist. Throwing down the pole, he brought a 
stool and climbed up on it to get a better view of the 
sparrows’ home. Two little featherless mites of red 
flesh, baby sparrows hardly a day old, lay inside, 
while their parents hovered round Rahim Khan’s 
face, screaming threateningly. He barely had a 
glimpse of the inside of the nest when the mother 
sparrow attacked him. 

‘Oh damn, you vixen, you might have plucked 
out my eye,’ exclaimed Rahim Khan with his 
characteristic hollow laugh, and climbed down from 
his perch. He was strangely amused by the little bird’s 
heroic efforts to save their home and children. The 
sparrows’ nest suffered no harm that day and peace 
reigned in Rahim Khan’s hut. 

.Next day he resumed his daily work. Still no 
one talked to him in the village. From morning 
till late in the afternoon he would toil in the field. 



SPARROWS 147 

ploughing the furrow and watering the crops, but 
he returned home before sunset. Then he would 
lie on his cot, smoking his hookah and watching with 
lively interest the antics of the sparrow family. The 
two little ones had now grown into fine young birds, 
and he called them Nuru and Bundu ^er his lost 
sons whom he had not seen for several years. The 
four sparrows were his only friends in the world. 
His neighbours were still frightened of him and re- 
garded his recent peaceful behaviour with suspicion. 
They were genuinely astonished that for some time 
no one had seen him beating his bullocks. Nathpo 
and Chhiddoo themselves were happy and grateful 
and their bruised bodies had almost healed. 

One monsoon evening, when the sky was overcast 
with threatening clouds, Rahim KJhan returned from 
the fields a little earlier than usual. He found a 
group of children playing on the road. They ran 
away as they saw him, and even left their shoes behind 
in their haste. In vain did Rahim Khan shout, ‘Why 
are you running away ? I am not going to beat you.* 
Meanwhile, it had started drizzling and he hurried 
homewards to tie up the bullocks before the big down- 
pour came, • 

Entering his hut, Rahim Khan lighted the earthen- 
ware oil lamp and placed some crumbs of bread for 
the sparrows before he prepared his own dinner. 
‘O Nuru ! O Bundu !’ he shouted, but the sparrows 
did not come out. Anxious to find out what had 
happened to his friends, he peered into the nest and 
found the quartet scared and sitting huddled up 
within their feathers. At the very spot where the 
nest lay, the roof was leaking. Rahim Khan took a 

11 



14B K. AHMAD ABBAS 

ladder and went out in the pouring rain to repair 
the damage* By the time the job was satisfactorily 
done he was thoroughly drenched. As he sat on 
the cot Rahim Khan sneezed, but he did not heed 
the warning and went to sleep. Next morning he 
Awoke with a high fever. 

When the villagers did not see him going to the 
fields for several days they grew anxious and some of 
them came to see what was the matter. Through a 
crack in the door they saw him lying on the cot talking, 
so they ttiought, to himself. ‘O Bundu, O Nuru, 
who will feed you when I am gone ?’ 

The peasants shook their heads sympathetically. 
*Poor fellow,’ they said, ‘he has gone mad. We will 
•send for his wife to look after him.’ 

Next morning, when Rahim Khan’s wife, anxious 
and weeping, came with her sons, a group of neighbours 
collected in sympathy. The door was locked from 
the inside, and in spite of loud knocking no one opened 
it. When they broke their way in they found the large 
and gaunt frame of Rahim lying in the brooding 
silence of the room, broken only by the flutterings 
of four sparrows. 



MANJERI S: ISVARAN 
Between Two Flags 

I 

\ ND so the long, dark night of centuries had come 
•^to an end, and freedom’s dawn was slowly 
silvering the Indian horizon. 

The banner of Motherland, the brave Tricolour, 
saffron and white and green, with the Asoka Wheel 
embossed in blue in the middle, was unfurled in a 
solemn hour on the floor of the Constituent Assembly. 

‘This is not a flag of empire,’ spoke th^ leader, the 
adored of the people in accents dignified, eloquent, 
passionate, ‘this is not a flag of empire, a flag of impe- 
rialism, a flag 'Of domination over anybody, - but a 
symbol of freedom not only for ourselyes, but of aU 
people who may see it. 

Mahatma Gandhi-ki-jai ! 

‘Under this flag there is no difference between a 
prince and a peasant ; between rich and poor ; 
between man and woman,* declaimed the poetess. 

Tumultuous cheers. 

‘On the centre of the flag is white, the path of light, 
truth, and simplicity. The Wheel of Asoka represents 
virtue : dhama and satya ; it protects the nation 
against stagnation. The saffron colour represents the 
spirit of renunciation and humility, and green our 
relations with the soil. Under this flag, in all humility 
and in a spirit of renunciation, a paradise would be 
built up in India,’ interpreted the philosopher. 

Hushed reverence. 

Leader, poetess philosopher — ^the major voices of 



150 


MANJERI S. ISVARAN 

these three to which were added the voices of the minor 
in a humbler key, which moved many to the verge of 
ecstasy, were not moving enough to the head or heart 
of Rao Bahadur R. Kalyanarama Sastri, Retired 
Deputy Collector ; reading the text of the speeches, 
as reported by journalists in the daily newspapers, 
he was not infected with any kind of emotion. The 
words left him cold. 

Freedom ! To do what ? Democracy ! Good God, 
how many brands of it ! Government of the people 
by the people for the people ! Comradeship ! When 
your neighbour trusts and mistrusts you at the same 
moment ! Unity ! It’s the twin brother of diversity 1 
Words, words, words, that were bandied about in the 
realm of concepts and ideals; words that were emptier 
in the mouths of empty patriots who angle for minister- 
ships, who fawn on the people only to gull them-— 
phew, how disgusting ! 

The Rao Bahadur curbed himself. At his advanced 
age — ^he was on the wrong side of sixty — and when 
he was looking poorly, he should not excite himself 
so. But in fairness to him it must be said that he was 
not making any serious political observations ; they 
were merely the personal reflections of an embittered 
man whose politics, if he had any, derived its particular 
hue from loyal service to and shelter under the Union 
Jack for thirty long years. 

The Tricolour prodded his memory, provoked his 
bitterness. The Sastri remembered. The thing in his 
Breast showed its edge still keen, hurting like a razor. 


H 

R. Kalyanarama was one of the first batch of 



BETWEEN TWO FLAGS 15 E 

Brahmin lads who went in for higher education at the 
University in the earlier half of the eighteen-eighties. 
After graduating from the Christian College, Madras, 
with the distinction of winning the Miller Gold Medal 
for topping the list in English in the entire Presidency, 
he entered the Revenue Department as R. Kalya- 
narama Sastri, b.a., Clerk, to earn a monthly 
emolument of fifteen rupees. He was a middle-class 
man jfrom a decent home who had his own ‘hare of 
a decent patrimony Marrying when he was only 
seventeen, his taking the academic degree coincided 
with the birth of a son to him. His wife too was 
middle-class, a sweet girl brought up in the tradition 
of a perfect domesticity, and together they had made 
their life happy. Kalyanarama Sastri had two worlds — 
his home and his office ; however, his intense devotion 
to both welded them into one. Nagalakshmi, the 
Sastri’s wife, in the vernal years of their conjugal life 
always thought of him as a paragon among males ; 
his handsome figure, his broad forehead lustrous with 
the three streaks of sacred ashes or sandal paste, his 
hair as thick and black as her own which he tied into 
a nest (and what a charming way he had in tying 
it 1) and hid under the bigger nest of his turban when 
going to office — this image of him fashioned and re- 
fashioned every hour and every minute, with many a 
little detail thrown in lovingly to complete it, turned her 
into a vessel full of sentiments and, without her being 
conscious of it, tear-drops of joy like the early rhoming 
dews would brim her eyes and soften her face to the 
molten mellowness of the sarat moon. Not one among 
a hundred young women had a husband who would 
think so lovingly, understandingly, of his wife as did her 



152 MANJERI S.’ ISVARAN 

own ; Nagalakshmi was proud but not vain. As 
partners in the holy bond of matrimony they were 
admirably fitted, content with each other in their 
ardours and disclosures of body and soul, and happy 
as the day is long with their growing son. And thus 
absorbed, they had no time to widen the circle of 
their social contacts which was necessarily small, 
limited to the families of certain fellow-clerks ; their 
hibernation seemed to be in the interests of some higher 
purpose in life. 

R. .Kalyanarama Sastri did exceedingly well. With- 
in a few years of entering service, he passed the Depart- 
mental Examinations in all the four subjects, Revenue, 
Criminal, Account Test, and Translation, in the 
Higher Grade ; in the superior stratum of official- 
dom — if it is not revealing a secret — his answers were 
talked of as models ; especially, his answers to the 
questions in the paper on Civil Service Regulations 
were, for their clarity and originality, considered as 
equal to Sri Sankara’s commentary on thtBhagavadgita. 
As Revenue Inspector, his record of work was splendid. 
His amaish was a wonder ; exactly by the end of the 
official year — ^he never once extended it to the fasH — 
the collection of kists was complete and his Jirka was 
clear, much earlier than the rest of the Taluq. His 
highest achievement, however, was his bringing to 
light four new subdivisions, two of them coconut 
gardens and two wet lands, in which concealed culti- 
vation had been going on for over half a decade ; it 
was an atrocious swindle of the Provincial exchequer ; 
the salt of His Majesty’s Government that he was 
eating seemed to turn into dhatura in his mouth, and 
the sense of righteous indignation made the Sastri 



153 


BETWEEN TWO FLAGS 

blame himself for not having made the discovery 
sooner ; and a part of that indignation he did not 
refrain from directing against his predecessors whose 
omission, he felt, was intentional. For t hi s meritorious 
work he got a gracious nod of approbation from the 
powers that be, a finely phrased appreciative reference 
from the pen of Henry Martin Winterbotham, I.C.S., 
Revenue Divisional Officer, and promotion as Sub- 
Magistrate. And close upon this joyous event Mr 
Winterbotham was installed in bromide as one of the 
household gods of Kalyanarama Sastri, along with 
Queen Mary and King George V, whose portraits in 
natural colours the Sastri had cut out from one of the 
annual calendars of Huntley & Palmers Ltd, arid 
enclosed in gilded frames, an inch wide and fihgreed 
in arabesque, adorning them with paper garlands 
gorge de pigeon. 

The star of Kalyanarama Sastri was in the ascen- 
dant. He began to exercise his magisterial powers 
with great probity ; hardly any of his judgements 
were reviewed by the Sub-Collector, who was struck 
with their legal profundity and simple vigour of 
expression. The District Magistrate again took 
note. 

The twelve-month period of probation for the 
Sastri, as Sub-Magistrate, was ending. And as though 
the Allies knew it and its significance to the administra- 
tion of the empire, they fired their last shot at 
Mannheim ; the Treaty of V.ersailles was signed, and 
Kalyanarama Sastri plunged himself heart and soul 
into the victory celebrations of the Taluq — ^feeding the 
poor and distributing clothes to them, flitting through 
the scenes of merry-making, laree-shows and folk- 



154 MANJERI S. ISVARAN 

dances and acrobatic displays. And, already marked 
for preferment, he found himself suddenly promoted to 
the post of Tahsildar, and he could not help 
remembering the conjuror’s trick in which a mango 
seed had sprouted and shot into a plant and bore 
Suit — all under a basket and in .the wink of an eye ! 
The wand of H.M.G. was really that of a coriiuror. 
Invisibly it was waved again and the King’s Birthday 
Honours brought him the title of Rao Saheb. 

in 

Meanwhile things had changed in the world out- 
side. An entity known as the Indian National 
Congress which aimed at the political emancipation 
of India was becoming increasingly powerful ; there 
were riots and killings all over the country, largely in 
the North ; and Gandhi, the Saviour, was pouring 
his voice of living waters into the ears and hearts of 
the masses. 

A servant of the British Government can have no 
politics except that of his master ; and a mind regi- 
mented as the Sastri’s by service to the ruling race, a 
service of blind obedience, can never think for itself 
and discover the psyche of a people groaning for 
centuries under a foreign yoke and struggling to 
overthrow it. Such a mind is compounded of 
fear and cowardice, hardening itself at the core foi 
self-protection ; it despises what it is afraid to under- 
stand but intuitively ki^ows to be true, and anything 
that threatens its sense of security it treats with a high 
and dry cynicism. Rao Saheb R. Kalyanarama 
Sastri, Tahsildar, became cynical of the anarchic 
unconstitutional methods of the Gandhian Movement. 



BETWEEN TWO FLAGS 155 

Gandhi, he told his wife Nagalakshmi, whose adoration 
for him increased with the increasing years, was 
trying to make the world in his own image ; it was 
labour lost. The poor woman nodded her head as 
if acknowledging the wisdom of her husband, and her 
smile which alternated between utter blankness and 
bewilderment registered the fact that although the 
world outside had changed a lot, nothing had happened 
to impede the placid flow of their domestic life, 
enriched by a daughter aged ten and to whom she 
had transferred the greater part of her loveliness. And 
the greater part of her attention too, for Raja Raman, 
the first-bom and now a lad of sixteen, did not clamour 
for it ; . his interest was rooted in his studies ; he was 
a student in the Sixth Form and nearing the end of 
his High School course. 

To the casual eye of the fond mother, Raja Raman 
was still Raja Raman, immersed in his lessons, cheerful 
in his games. But to the critical eye of the father, who 
was away on camp for two months in the quarter, there 
was more in the son than met the maternal gaze. 

And the headmaster had talked. Much against his 
will. He had to maintain discipline over the boys — 
including sons of Tahsildars. 

‘Such a bright lad. Raja Raman,’ he said to the 
Sastri. ‘I’ve no complaint to make against his studies. 
But of late he has grown a Kttle careless and negligent.’ 

‘Is he getting into bad company ?’ asked the father, 
anxious. 

‘Not exactly.’ The teacher looked uneasy. 

‘Then—’ 

‘I meant to say his negligence has a cause, and it 
surely is not bad company. I don’t spare the cane. 



156 MANJERI S. ISVARAN 

Sir, but it only comes to that once in a blue moon. 
Raja Raman is extraordinarily intelligent, but he 
should not allow certain ideas to get into his young 
head.’ 

‘What ideas ?’ 

‘Politics,’ said the headmaster, a faint sneer twist- 
ing his lips. He brought out the word slowly, with 
the relish of a sadist. 

‘Politics !’ echoed the Sastri, astonished. ‘What ?* 

‘Swaraj for India and all that nonsense Gandhi 
and his Congress are propagating. I suspect influence 
from outside.’ 

‘I hope you aren’t making a mistake.’ 

‘I’ve never made one, my good Sir, in all my service 
of twenty-five years as a schoolmaster. I made the 
discovery unexpectedly. Every morning at ten 
minutes to ten, before the classes begin work, all the 
boys assemble in the Common Hall for prayer. I 
conduct the prayer personally. One of the assistant 
masters calls a boy by name ; he comes forward, 
stands on the dais, and sings a hymn or two, after 
which he unfurls the Union Jack and salutes it. The 
boys then disperse in order to their respective classes. 
Raja Raman has been singled out by me more than 
once, for you see he is gifted with a musical voice ; but 
whenever he could, he excused himself on the score 
that he had a sore throat or a bad headache, and I 
was indulgent. And recently, Sir, he refused outright, 
I was angry with him for the first time since he entered 
school, and after class hours, in my room, asked him, 
after a stroke or two of the cane, what made him behave 
so impertinently. And believe me. Sir, do you know how 
he an.swered me ? It was an insult to our motherland. 



BETWEEN TWO FLAGS 157 

an insult to our setf-respect, he said, to go on saluting 
the Union Jack when our patriots were being gagged 
and muzzled, beaten and thrown into gaols by the 
white man ! He would sing a hundred hymns at the 
prayer meeting, every day he would sing till his- 
throat split, but never more would he bo\v to that flag 
that has abased us !’ 

The headmaster broke off for a while with the effort 
of his talk — ^for his was an aided school subsisting on 
a grant from the Government, and any deviation from 
the norm would damn him and the institution ; a 
disgruntled assistant teacher might easily be a spy ; 
then calming himself, continued : 

‘So warn your son. Sir, in good time and make my 
task easy. It’s dangerous for a mere boy to have such 
ideas, I’ m inquiring from where this baleful influence is- 
emanating and I will crush it. Raja Raman, I jrepeat, 
is a ve,ry bright lad, I foresee a splendid future for him. 
And I’ve to keep the less bright boys in my charge 
where they belong. I have to maintain discipline. Now 
excuse me, Sir, if I have spoken too long and too warmly,’’ 
and bowing with a dignity that became him as a member 
of importance in the liquidation of illiteracy in the 
land, the headmaster took leave of the Tahsildar. 

IV 

Rao Saheb R, Kalyanarama Sastri was troubled' 
beyond measure at what he heard about his son. The 
words of the schoolmaster had sounded apparently 
simple, but they were barbs embalmed with courtesy, 
sure of their target ; plainly he had meant to say : 
‘You are a responsible officer of the Government, head! 
of a Taluq. And your son, an absurd little stripling,. 



1158 MANJERI S. ISVARAN 

prates of politics as if they were pumpkins. Check him 
before it is too late, else it will spell disaster to your 
position, your high standing with Authority.’ 

But the Sastri was not one easily to be intimidated, 
he knew how to hold his own, no matter how many 
ceilings thre 9 ,tened to fall. All the same he was irri- 
tated, distressed. It was Jamabandi time and work in 
the ofiSce was heavy. Revolving many thoughts in 
his mind he found them taking an abrupt turn to his 
youngest brother, now no more ; a brilliant fellow who 
had left the University without a degree, having been 
in his undergraduate days attracted by the dynamic 
personality of DrBesant, Theosophy, and the Home Rule 
Movement. He had taken to journalism, learning his 
craft in the New India^ worked on the staff of the Indian 
Patriot, written like mad, talked like hell, and burnt 
himself out long before his time. Was little Raja 
Raman taking after his- late uncle ? How gentle the 
slip of a boy looked ! But beneath that gentleness, 
the same that the dead brother had — the perception 
was startling — there was the same unyielding obdur- 
acy which like a bit of granite in a ball of clay 
twisted the edge of anything that came to dislodge it. 
It is a wise father thatknows his own son. But he was not 
going to be wise after the event. The boy obviously 
did not know what he was talking about ; thank God, 
as yet no harm had been done. He must be put out of 
mischief’s way. 


y 

There is no knowing beforehand whether a trifle 
will remain as a trifle or will assume serious propor- 
tions The circumstances, the complexion put on 



BETWEEN TWO FLAGS 

what is involved and the character of the persons- 
concerned decide its levity or gravity. 

‘So you have had a disagreement with your head- 
master,’ the Sastri asked his son, straight. 

Instinctively Raja Raman knew that the headmaster 
had visited his father at the office, to present the ‘pro- 
gress report’ in person. The sneak ! 

‘There was nothing to disagree about, father. I 
stated what I thought was right.’ 

‘At your age. Raja, right or wrong is not a thing, 
to be decided by you. Your elders should decide it for 
you.’ 

‘Certainly the headmaster has nothing to do with 
any decision outside the studies of a pupil.’ 

‘While at school you have to obey him implicitly,, 
studies or no studies.’ 

‘I’m sorry, father.’ 

‘Sorry for what ?’ 

‘That I don’t find it possible to obey that man in* 
what he wants me, rather what he forces me to do.’ 

‘Man ! Remember he’s your teacher,’ cut in the 
Sastri' ; ‘talk of him with respect.’ 

Raja Raman was silent ; his quivering lips and- 
nostrils betrayed the sensitiveness of a thoroughbred. 
The Sastri watched his son. The face of his dead 
brother flashed across his mind. The same mettle t' 

‘I’m ready to sing a hundred hymns every morning- 
at the prayer-meeting in the school, to sing till I am 
hoarse, but, father, I won’t salute the Union Jack. It’s- 
silly, it’s at^ul,’ sputtered the boy. 

The very words the headmaster had reported,, 
thought the Sastri, looking at his son, intent on the bit. 
of granite within the irmocent ball of clay. 



i60 MANJERI S. ISVARAN 

‘What is it that offends you, my boy ?’ 

‘Everything — the flag, the formula, he unfurling 
and the furling.’ 

‘The formula !’ 

‘Yes.’ And Raja Raman began unfolding an 
imaginary flag : ‘I salute the flag of my country and 
the empire for which it stands, with many nations but 
all one and indivisible, with liberty and justice for 
aU.’ 

A slap on the cheek, that struck like lightning, put 
abruptly out of joint his pose of mock-seriousness ; 
his father had hit him. He felt the world around him 
•spinning, spinning, a buzzing noise in his head as if it 
were a hive of furious bees ; and he saw in a daae the 
•anxious strained face of his mother with a comb in her 
hand which to him looked like a monstrous spade ; 
the half-parted • half-brushed curly black locks of his 
pretty little sister roared like an umbrageous bush on 
fire ; he was floating out, unbodied, into space ; but 
in a moment he had recovered himself and rushed out 
from the presences that frightened. Suddenly, in 
his wake, there came a crash, a tinkling metallic 
clatter, as of gravel being thrown violently on panes of 
glass ; the Sastri caught up with his son, and before 
him, shocking enough, on the floor of the study, lay 
the portraits of Qjieen Mary and King George V 
smashed to spillikins 

That instant was like a thunderclap in the snug 
little world of Kalyanarama Sastri from which he was 
wont to look at the world beyond. Of a sudden he 
changed from a handsome, middle-aged man to one old 
and weary, with lines of bitterness deeply etched around 
his mouth and across his forehead. He never forgave 



BETWEEN TWO FLAGS 161 

the son who had desecrated his temple and trampled on 
his gods. 

They talked of a new India but he refused to see 
anything new aiound him. There were the railways 
and the telegraphs ; the monsoons were either early or 
late in setting in ; the rice crops were bumper or poor ; 
vegetables plentiful or scarce ; he went on camp for two 
months in the quarter ; drew his salary and travelling 
allowance ; slept with his wife, petted his daughter 
(thank heaven for the gift of a daughter) ; waited for 
the event of his lift to the rank of Deputy Collector ; 
and retired as one with the title of Rao Bahadur. 

But unmindful of his small world to whose wreckage 
he clung tenaciously, India advanced. The sun 
lessened his brightness on the dominion over palm and 
pine of His Britannic Majesty. India advanced. It 
turned out a generation of Raja Ramans, courageous, 
upright, selfless youths who, working imder the 
inspiring guidance of heroic leaders counted no sacrifice 
as too great for the cause of the motherland. And 
was his Raja Raman alive ? Who knows ? He may 
or may not be. But he remains as the deathless symbol 
of an independent spirit that has won, waving the 
banner of Free Indi singing the song of ecstasy 

Rao Bahadur R. Kalyanarama Sastri, Retired 
Deputy Collector, inclines his head and listens. He 
looks incredulous, bewildered, angry. Two voices 
fight for supremacy, confusing his feeble hearing : 

I salute the flag of my country and the empire for which 
it stands ... 

This is not a flag of empire, a flag of imperialism, a 
flag of domination . .. 



SARATCHANDRA CHATTERJI 
Laloo 

I 

T^hen I wa5 a little boy I had a friend called Laloo. 

’ ’ That was quite half a century back — that is, such 
a long time ago that you children can have no very 
cleax notion of it. We used to be class-fellows in a 
small Bengali school. We must have been some ten 
or eleven years of age then. Laloo was infinitely 
resourceful in devising means by which to frighten 
people out of their wits, or in getting his own back. 
He managed to give his mother such a fright by 
throwing a rubber snake in her way that she sprained 
her ankle quite badly, and limped for over a week- 
Furious because of this escapade, Laloo’s mother said, 
‘A tutor must be found for Laloo. He will come in 
the evenings to do lessons with Laloo, and that will 
leave him no time for his pranks.’ 

However, Laloo’s father could not concur in this. 
He had never had a tutor himself, and only after a 
bitter struggle had he been able to get his education, 
and succeeded in becoming a flourishing lawyer. He 
hoped his son would, like him, De able to do his work 
without anybody’s aid. Finally, his parents agreed 
that the year Laloo lost the first place in his class a 
tutor would be asked to come and reside in the house. 
Laloo escaped the ordeal for the occasion, but he 
harboured a grievance against his mother, since it 
was she who had tried to get him saddled with a tutor. 
And Laloo knew that getting a tutor to live in the 
house was quite as bad as calling in the police. 



LALOO 163 

Laioo’s father was a well-to-do gentleman. He had 
had his old house altered into a three-storied mansion 
a few years before this. Since then Laioo’s mother’s 
fervent hope was that she would be able to induce 
her preceptor to visit her, so that she could offer her 
respects to him. Being an aged man, her preceptor 
was unwilling to travel all the way from Faridpur, 
but now a favourable opportunity had arisen. Having 
gone to Banaras on the occasion of a solar eclipse, the 
Smritirafna had written to -say that on his way back 
he would stop at her house, and give her his blessing. 
Laioo’s mother’s felicity knew no bounds. She devoted 
herself entirely to making all sorts of arrangements, 
knowing that her heart’s desire was soon to be ful- 
filled, and that her preceptor was to bestow the dust 
of his feet on her house. The house would be sanctified 
by his presence. 

The big room on the ground floor was cleared, and 
a new ribbon-bed and mattress were got ready for 
the preceptor’s rest. One comer of the room was 
set apart for his prayers, as climbing up to the second 
floor to the family prayer-room would have exhausted 
the old man. 

Soon after the preceptor arrived. But what a 
mischance ! The sky that day was quite overcast 
with black clouds, and it rained as hard as it blew j 
there seemed to be no respite all day long. 

What with preparing the sweets and the fruits for 
her preceptor, Laioo’s mother had hardly a free 
moment the whole day. She broke away from h^ 
work for a few minutes just to go to the room, make 
up the bed, and tuck in the mosquito-curtains. Many 
topics of conversation having kept the two engaged 

12 



164 SARATOHANDRA GHATTERJI 

in the evening, the travel-weary old preceptor went 
to bed when he had finished his repast. The servants 
also withdrew for the night. Lulled by the softness 
of the bed, the gratified old naan blessed Nandarani, 
Laloo’s mother, in his heart. 

But late at night he was suddenly awakened. The 
roof seemed to be leaking, and the water-drops found 
their way through the mosquito-curtain on to his well- 
nourished paunch ! How very cold the drops were ! 
Bewildered, the old man jumped out of bed and, as 
he wiped himself dry, muttered, ‘Nandarani has had 
a new house bujlt, but it seems the blazing sun of these 
parts has already made cracks in the roof!’ The 
ribbon-bed not being heavy, he managed to drag it 
and the mosquito-net to another part of the room, 
and lay down again. But not for more than half a 
minute I Just as his eyes were closing, a few more 
drops just as icy as the first ones fell precisely on the 
same spot of his anatomy. The Snaritiratna rose 
up again, and puUed his bed to another side of the 
room, saying, ‘Ah ! it seems the roof has cracked 
right across !’ Yet again, as he lay down, the cold 
water dripped on him. He wiped himself dry a 
third time, and lay down, to find that the trouble 
persisted. Again he shifted his groimd, this time to 
another side of the room, but it was the same all over 
again ! And now he realized that the bedding was 
wet, so that sleeping in it was out of the question. 
The Smritiratna fbxmd himself in an awkward pre- 
dicament. Being an aged man, he did not want to 
take the risk of going out of the room in an unknown 
house, but then staying in the room had its dangers 
too. Who was there to assure him that the cracked 



LALOO 165 

roof its^ would not come down on his head ? He 
made his way out on to the veranda in alarm. There 
was a lantern burning in a comer, but not a soul 
anywhere — and it was dreadfiiUy dark. 

The rain poured down as hard the hurricane 
blew. It was hardly possible to stand. Where were 
the servants ? Where was the room they slept in ? 
He had not the faintest idea. He shouted out to them, 
but nobody replied. A wooden bench, used by the 
humbler sort of clients who came to see Laloo’s father, 
was lying in a comer of the veranda. Finding 
himself quite helpless, the preceptor sat down on it. 
His self-esteem received a severe shock, and he realized 
it inwardly, but what was he to do ? The northern 
breeze carried the rain-drops into the veranda and 
the cold made him shiver all over. He draped himself 
in the loose end of his dhoti, and drawing up his knees 
tried to discover how to get the maximum of comfort 
possible in the circumstances. The fatigue bom of 
much exertion and many mischances made his muscles 
completely slack, and embittered his feelings ; his 
eyelids were heavy with sleep. The unusually full 
repast and the equally unusual night-watching made 
him emit a belch or two foretelling an attack of 
acidity : there was no end, he found, to his miseries. 
And just then there came another unthinkable 
aflOtiction ! The big gnats so frequent in the western 
districts started serenadmg him in both ears ! At 
first his eyelids refused to scrutinize this new peril, but 
his mind clouded over with suspicion : what could be 
the number of these invaders ? The doubt was a 
matter of a couple of minutes at the outside. The 
unknown danger became only too clear ; the precep- 



166 SARATGHANDRA CHATTERJI 

tor realized that his tormentors were innumerable. 
Even the bravest would have quailed in the presence 
of such an army. The irritation caused by their bite 
was only equalled by the frantic itching that followed. 
The Smritiratna bolted from the spot, but they gave 
chase. The room was impossible because of the rain 
coming through the roof, and the veranda because 
of the mosquitoes. He found that the uninterrupted 
motion of his limbs and the constant rapid waving of 
his towel had no appreciable effect on their attack. 

The Smritiratna began racing from one end of the 
veranda to the other, and even though it was winter 
he began perspiring all over ! He wanted to yell in 
his agony, but desisted from such childishness. In 
his imagination, he saw Nandarani comfortably 
sleeping in her soft bed, and the other inmates of the 
house wrapped in carefree slumber. Only his torments 
were to have no end. Somewhere a clock struck four. 
Tired out, he exclaimed, ‘Well, bite your worst, you 
wretches ! Bite as much as ever you can — I can do 
nothing !’ Shielding his back as well as he could he 
sat down against one of the walls of the veranda. 
‘If I survive till the morning,’ he said, ‘not a moment 
more shall I stay in these accursed parts. The first 
train I can catch to get away from here will be the 
one I shall get into. I now understand why my heart 
did not look forward to a visit to this place.’ Then 
in a few moments sleep, which effaces all agonies, 
wiped out the miseries he had faced through the 
night, and the Smritiratna slept the sleep of the semi- 
conscious. 

Nandarani got up the moment it was dawn. She 
must try her best to serve the preceptor. In her opinion 



LALOO 167 

the old man had only had a light meal — though in 
fact it was quite a substantial one. She had therefore 
an uneasy feeling that she had not been able to treat 
her revered preceptor as she should. Now that it 
was day, she must do her best to make good the 
deficiencies of the last evening. 

Coming down to the ground floor, she found the door 
open. She felt a little ashamed that her preceptor 
should have got up first. As she peeped into the room 
she perceived that he was not in, but what a sight 
met her eyes ! The bed had been shifted from the 
south side of the room to the north, her preceptor’s 
canvas handbag had moved of its ownfirom the window- 
sill where she had placed it to the centre of the 
room, the copper vessels, the square of carpet, and the 
other things that were to be used in making his devo- 
tions, were scattered all over the floor — she could not 
understand why. She went out and called loudly 
to the servants, but nobody was up and about. Where 
then had her preceptor gone out, unaccompanied ? 
Suddenly she noticed — ^what was it ? SometWng like 
a human shape huddled in the gloom. She plucked 
up courage to go near it, and bending forward perceived 
that it was her preceptor ! In unspeakable alarm, 
she screamed, ‘Father ! Father !’ 

The Smritiratna awoke, opened his eyes, straight- 
ened himself, and sat upright. Alarmed, anxious, 
overwhelmed with shame, Nandarani broke into sobs 
and inquired, ‘Father ! why are you here ?’ 

The old man rose to his feet and said, ‘There was 
no end to my tribulations last night, ray child !’ 

‘Why, Father ?’ 

‘You have had a new house built, my child, but 



168 SARATGHANDRA CHATTERJI 

the roof seems to have cracks everywhere. All through 
the night the rain does not seem to have fallen any- 
where else than on my person. Whichever way I 
removed my bed the rain came through the roof. 
Alarmed lest the roof should come down on my head, 
I ran out. But did that mean the least respite,* my 
child ? Whole legions of gnats and mosquitoes swarmed 
round me like locusts to suck my blood. I had to 
fly from one end of the veranda to the other and back 
again ! They have probably drained half the blood 
from my body, my child !’ 

When Nandarani noticed the plight of her aged 
preceptor, whose visit she had so long and so anxiously 
prayed for, her eyes filled with tears. Yet she protest- 
ed, ‘But Father, there are two rooms just above the 
one you occupied last night. How could the rain 
have pierced its way through three roofs to reach you ?’ 
As she was uttering these words, she suddenly realized 
that this was probably one of the diabolical tricks of 
that imp Laloo ! She ran to the bed and, feeling it 
all over, discovered that a large part of it was quite 
wet, and also that drops were still falling from the top 
of the mosquito-curtain. Pulling it down she saw a 
lump of ice in a rag. It had not completely melted 
even then, and there was a small piece still in the rag. 
She rushed out of the room like one demented and 
shouted to the servants, to whoever came in her path, 
‘Where is that infernal Laloo ? Never mind your 
duties, just find out where the rascal is, and then 
thrash him all the way here !’ 

Laloo’s father, who was just coming downstairs, was 
aghast when he saw what his wife was up to, and said, 
‘Whatever are you. doing ? What can the matter be ?* 



LALOO 169 

Nandarani burst into tears and said, ‘Either you 
will have to send your Laloo out of this house, or I 
shall this very day expiate the enormity of this action 
by throwing myself into the Ganges !’ 

‘But what has Laloo done ?’ 

‘Gome in and see what he has done to my unoffending 
preceptor. !’ They all went in. Nandarani explained 
what had happened, and showing him the bed 
exclaimed ‘How can anyone live in the same house as 
this dreadful boy !’ 

The preceptor now understood all, and realizing 
his own silliness he burst into a loud guffaw. 

Laloo’s father turned his face away. 

The servants came back saying, ‘Laloo Babu is 
not to be found anywhere in the house !’ And then 
another man arrived and reported, ‘He is at Aimtie’s 
house, having his breakfast. Auntie wouldn’t let 
him come.* 

‘Auntie’ was Nandarani’s younger sister. Her 
husband also was a lawyer, and lived in another part 
of the town. 

For the next fortnight Laloo did not venture to 
come near the house. 


n 

As I told you before, my friend’s pet name was 
Laloo. Of course, he had another name that he 
went by outside the family circle, but I have no re- 
collection of it. You children must be aware of the 
fact that Lai, in Hindi, means ‘beloved’. I do not 
know who gave him his pet name, but rarely are men 
and their names so completely in accord. He was 
loved by everybody. 



170 SARATGHANDRA CHATTERJI 

When, our schooldays being over, we joined college, 
Laloo said he must set up a business. He started 
working as a contractor, having taken a loan of ten 
rupees from his mother. We would tell him, ‘Laloo, 
your capital is a meagre ten rupees !’ and he would 
reply with a smile, ‘How much more does one nee^i ? 
That is quite enough.’ 

Everyone loved him, and he was never out of work. 
So we now began to meet him frequently on the road, 
shading himself with an umbrella, getting minor 
repairing jobs done by a few workmen. Whenever 
he noticed us, he used to chaff us saying, ‘Run along, 
boys ! Run along, or there will be an absent-mark 
in your attendance register !’ 

When we had been together some years before, at 
the Bengali school, Laloo was the mechanic for every- 
body’s petty jobs. In -the bag in which he carried 
his books, you were sure to find a pestle, a nail-cutter, 
a knife with a broken blade, an awl for boring holes, 
a horseshoe. Nobody knew where he had got these 
assorted tools from, but it is a fact that with their 
help he could do almost anything. Mending the 
umbrellas of the school, fixing all the loose slate-frames, 
sewing up garments torn during games — these and 
many otW such jobs were done by him, without 
ever a refusal, and done excellently. On the occasion 
of the Chhat festival, one year, he invested in a few 
pice-worth of coloured paper and some pith, and 
made a new type of toy which brought him almost 
two rupees and a half at the bathing-ghat on the 
Ganges. And out of this amount he stood us a hearty 
feed of roasted groundnuts. 

The years rolled on, and we grew up into youth. 



LALOO 171 

Nobody could surpass I^aloo in the gymnasium. 
Endowed with exceptional strength and unbounded 
courage, he did not seem to know what fear meant. 
He wa^ ready whenever a person appealed to him, 
and if there was any trouble he could be counted upon 
to be there first. But he had one besetting short- 
coming. If ever he got the opportunity of giving 
someone a fright he could not control himself. In 
such a case all — ^young or old or .his elders— were one 
to him. We could not imagine how those remarkably 
ingenious stratagems by which he frightened people 
out of their wits flashed on him in a moment. Let 
me tell you one or two such incidents. There used 
to be an annual worship of the Goddess Kali, at the 
house of Manohar Chatteqi, a man of the locality. 
One year, the blacksmith who was to perform the 
sacrifice was missing, and midnight was about to 
strike. People rushed to the blacl^mith’s house, and 
discovered that he was unconscious because of a 
stomach-ache. When this news reached the house, 
everybody was overwhelmed. What was to be done ? 
Where could another person be found, at such an 
hour, to perform the sacrifice ? The ceremony would 
be incomplete ! Somebody suddenly remembered 
that Laloo could do the work. He had sacrificed a 
goat on many such occasioiis. People ran to him, 
but Laloo, who was asleep, when wakened said 
‘No*. 

‘No ! How can that be ? An obstacle in the worship 
of the goddess would mean complete devastation !’ 

Laloo replied, ‘If it must mean that, let it come! 
I have performed such a sacrifice as a boy, but I 
cannot do it now.* 



172 SARATCHANDRA CHATTERJI 

Those who had come tq call Laloo began to beat 
their heads in despair. There were only some ten or 
fifteen minutes left for the hour to strike, and then 
would follow ruin and confusion. Nobody, would 
survive the wrath of the mighty Kali! Laloo’s father 
came up and ordered Laloo to go. ‘These people have 
come,’ he said, ‘because they have no other resource. 
You must go.’ It was not for Laloo to disregard 
his father’s order. 

When Manohar Ghatteiji saw Laloo his fears were 
allayed. There was no time to be lost. Instantly 
a goat was dedicated, its forehead marked with ver- 
milion, a wreath of hibiscus flowers was hung round its 
neck, and the neck fitted into the wooden sacrificial 
post. The loud uproar caused by the whole assembly 
yelling, ‘Mother ! Mother !’ completely drowned 
the last piteous cries of the helpless and innocent 
victim, the sacrificial sword in Laloo’s hand flashed up 
and swept down in an instant, and then the blood 
jetting out from the slaughtered neck coloured the 
black earth red. Laloo kept his eyes closed for an 
instant. The immense din made by the little drums, 
the big drums, and the gongs came almost to a stop. 
In due course, the second goat, which had been 
shivering at a dikance, had the vermilion mark put 
on its forehead, and its neck wreathed with a red 
garland, and then the scene of the sacrificial post, 
the same last agonizing bleats, the many-throated 
noise of voices calling ‘Mother ! Mother I’ in unison, 
was repeated. Again the bloodstained sacrificial 
sword in Laloo’s hand swept up and came down in 
the twinkling of an eyelid, the severed body of the 
victim jerked its limbs a few times as a last protest 



LALOO 17S 

to some unknown power, and then fell back into 
repose ; the blood from the second severed neck 
reddened a little more of the crimsoned earth. 

The •drummers were drumming away like mad, 
the assembly in the courtyard was making an in- 
describable noise, and, seated on a square of carpet 
on the front veranda, Manohar Ghatterji was repeating, 
with closed eyes, the sacred words of prayer, when 
all of a sudden Laloo gave a savage cry. All noises 
at once stopped abruptly. Everybody was struck 
dumb with terror. What could this portend ? Laloo’s 
eyeballs seemed to be whirling in his unnaturally 
widely parted eyes. Suddenly he shouted, ‘Where 
are the other goats ?’ 

One of the household replied, in a terrified voice, 
‘There arc no more goats. We offer only two as 
sacrifice.’ 

Laloo swung the bloodstained sacrificial sword 
above his head a couple of times, and then in a horribly 
discordant voice he bellowed, ‘No more goats ! That 
simply cannot be. The blood has gone to my head — 
give me more goats, or I shall offer whomever I can 
get hold of, as a human sacrifice. Ma ! Ma ! 
Victory to Kali I’ He cleared the distance firom one 
side of the sacrificial post to the other in a prodigious 
jump, his sword making rapid sweeps in the air. 
What happened after that was simply indescribable. 
In a body, everyone ran towards the main gate lest 
Laloo should catch him. It became a whirlpool 
of seething humanity, with people pushing one another 
and scrambling for space in order to slip through. 
Some fell down, some crawled on all fours to find a 
way through the legs of those who were standing, 



174 SARATGHANDRA GHATTERJI 

some had their necks caught under the arms of others 
and were all but suffocated. Some, trying to clamber 
over other people’s shoulders, fell forward on their 
faces — ^but all this was a matter of moments. And 
then there was not a soul to be seen ! 

Laloo roared, ‘Where is Manohar Chatterji ? 
Where has the priest vanished ?’ 

The priest was a lean person. He had run away 
in good time in the midst of the hubbub and ensconced 
himself behind the image of the goddess. The pre- 
ceptor of the house, who, seated on a square of kusa 
grass, had been reading the Ckandi, rose up quickly 
and screened himself behind one of the massive pillars 
of the veranda fronting the image. But the bulky 
Manohar Chatterji was incapable of running away. 
Laloo advanced, caught one of his hands with his own 
left hand, and said, ‘Come and place your neck in the 
notch of the sacrificial post !’ 

The sight of the blade ini his right hand, coupled 
with Laloo’s steely grip, made Manohar Chattegi’s 
heart all but fail. In a tearful voice he began im- 
ploring him, ‘Laloo, my child, look closely at me, I 
am not a goat, but a man ! I am your uncle, my child, 
your father is like a younger brother to me.’ 

‘I know nothing about that. The blood has gone 
to my head and I must make a sacrifice of you. It 
is the Mother’s behest i’ 

Manohar Chatteiji bm^t out into a loud cry, ‘No, 
my child, it cannot be the Mother’s behest, it can 
never be that — ^she is the Universal Mother !’ 

Laloo shouted, ‘Mother of the Universe ! You have 
the sense to understand that ! Will you ever again 
offer 'goats ? And call me to sacrifice them ? Speak!* 



LALOO 175 

Manohar Chatterji sobbed, ‘Never again, my child! 
Never again. I am taking a thrice-repeated oath 
before the Mother, that henceforward there shall be 
no more animal sacrifice in my house.’ 

‘You are sure ?’ 

‘Yes, my child, I am quite sure. Never again ! 
Let go my hand, my child, I must visit the bathroom !’ 

Laloo released his grip and said, ‘Well, go away. 

I will let you go. But where has that priest gone ? 
Where is the preceptor ?’ And as he jumped on to 
the inner veranda with another yell, there arose from 
behind the image and the pillar the notes of a couple 
of wailing and terrified throats. 

The bass and the treble of the two made such a 
strange and comical duet that Laloo could not 
control himself any longer. ‘Ha ! Ha ! Ha !’ he 
roared with laughter, and throwing the sacrificial 
sword to the ground with a dull thump, he ran quickly 
out of the house. 

It then became obvious to all that Laloo had pre- 
tended that the blood had gone to his head, and had 
played a trick on them. Out of sheer devilry, Laloo 
had given everybody such a fright and kept it up so 
long. In five minutes everybody came back 
from his hiding-place into the courtyard. The 
ceremony of worshipping the goddess had still to be 
performed, and there had been a sad interruption, 
but in the midst of the babel of voices Manohar 
Chatteiji repeatedly vowed, in the presence of all 
assembled, that if he did not have the young scoundrel 
awarded fifty blows with a shoe by his father the very 
next morning, he would change his own name ! 

But Laloo was spared this ignominy. Early next 



176 SARATGHANDRA CHATTERJI 

morning he ran away to some unknown place, and 
nobody could find out where he was* Then, after a 
week was over, he came back one evening^ under 
cover of darkness, entered Manohar Ghatterji^s house, 
obtained both his pardon and a blessing, and was thus 
able to escape his father’s wrath. Be that as it may, 
Manohar Ghatterji having made a vow in the presence 
of the goddess, animal sacrifices on the occasion 6f 
the Kali festival ceased in his house from that day. 

Translated by S. O, 3Deb. 



CONTRIBUTORS 

Rabindranath Tagore i$ supreme in almost every sphere of liter- 
ature, and hw short stories, poems and novels alike are permeated by 
the Indian spirit He has published several volumes of short stories 
some of which he himself translated into English, To an English reader 
Tagore's stories provide the most authentic picture of Bengali scenes 
and life. 

PttEM Chand was in his life-time r^arded as the greatest writer of 
short stories in ]^di. Since his death, his reputation has suffered 
a set-back, but his stories of village and middle-ciass life in the United 
Provinces are still the best of their kind. In dmost everything that 
Prem Chand writes, he introduces a social or political bias, 

Mulk Raj Anand is imquestionably the most distinguished living 
writer of fiction in English. His short stories are not very many, but 
like his novels, they show rare psycholo^cal insight and the writer's 
concern with social themes. Mulk Raj Anand is also a decerning 
art critic, and his knowledge of Indian literature and life is vast and 
discrimmating. 

Pramatha Chaudhury fint came into prominence by his contribu- 
tions to his own paper Sabuj Fatra, He possesses a delicate irony 
and a subtle sense of humour. His work Char lyari Katha {Tales of 
Four Friends) is a classic in Bengali literature. 

Raja Rao rose to fameby his novel (1938). His stories first 

appeared in various foreign magazines, and he first won recognition 
abroad. He writes in English. 

R. K. Najrayan is in many ways the most artistic of Indian short 
story writers in English. His stories bear a close resemblance to 
Russian models, notably Tchekov, and his style is notable for its economy 
of detail and purity. 

Tarashankar Banerjee is a powerful Bengali writer, whose work 
is characterized by a deep understanding of Bengali life. He can 
create a tr^c effect, as in the story in this volume, which is at once 
staggering and awe-inspiring. 

Rahul Sankrttyayak is one of the most distinguished men of let- 
ters in He has touched alm<»t every form of literature from 

travelogue to philosophical dissertation and fiction. He writes in 
this stoiy with a pronounced bias. 

Manjbrx S. Isvaran has published several slender volumes of 
short stories. He works with the skill of an artist, and approaches 



1 78 CONTRIBUTORS 

life with the vision of a poet. His short stories often possess a drram- 
like quality, and contain exquisite word-pictures. 

Bhabani Bhattacharya suddenly shot into fame by his novel So 
Many Hungers^ a powerful portrayal of the Bengal famine of 1942. 
He interprets with great insight the misery of modern Beqgal, 

K. Ahmad Abbas is a journalist as well as a short storv writer. He 
tcft> has been profoundly influenced by the conditions fallowing m the 
wake of the industrial impact on society. His writings are informed by a 
decided ‘progressive’ bias. 

Saratchandra Chatterjt was bom in a Bengal village in 1876, His 
early life was spent In Bihar, Bengal, and other parts of ln<iia, in the 
course of which he ^ gathered the experience which he used with 
such consummate skill in his novels and short stories. He also spent 
a few years in Burma, By the publication of a short story at 35 he 
won instant recognition, and retained this position till his death in 
1937. He is a great realist and easily the most popular among 
Bengal’s short story writers. 




